

Arms and the man I sing, who first made way,

Predestined exile, from the Trojan shore

To Italy, the blest Lavinian strand.

Smitten of storms he was on land and sea

By violence of Heaven, to satisfy ⁠5

Stern Juno’s sleepless wrath; and much in war

He suffered, seeking at the last to found

The city, and bring o’er his fathers’ gods

To safe abode in Latium; whence arose

The Latin race, old Alba’s reverend lords, ⁠10

And from her hills wide-walled, imperial Rome.



O Muse, the causes tell! What sacrilege,

Or vengeful sorrow, moved the heavenly Queen

To thrust on dangers dark and endless toil

A man whose largest honor in men’s eyes ⁠15

Was serving Heaven? Can gods such anger feel?



In ages gones an ancient city stood—

Carthage, a Tyrian seat, which from afar

Made front on Italy and on the mouths

Of Tiber’s stream; its wealth and revenues ⁠20

Were vast, and ruthless was its quest of war.

’T is said that Juno, of all lands she loved,

Most cherished this,—not Samos’ self so dear.

Here were her arms, her chariot; even then

A throne of power o’er nations near and far, ⁠25

If Fate opposed not, ’t was her darling hope

To ’stablish here; but anxiously she heard

That of the Trojan blood there was a breed

Then rising, which upon the destined day

Should utterly o’erwhelm her Tyrian towers; ⁠30

A people of wide sway and conquest proud

Should compass Libya’s doom;—such was the web

The Fatal Sisters spun.

⁠Such was the fear

Of Saturn’s daughter, who remembered well

What long and unavailing strife she waged ⁠35

For her loved Greeks at Troy. Nor did she fail

To meditate th’ occasions of her rage,

And cherish deep within her bosom proud

Its griefs and wrongs: the choice by Paris made;

Her scorned and slighted beauty; a whole race ⁠40

Rebellious to her godhead; and Jove’s smile

That beamed on eagle-ravished Ganymede.

With all these thoughts infuriate, her power

Pursued with tempests o’er the boundless main

The Trojans, though by Grecian victor spared ⁠45

And fierce Achilles; so she thrust them far

From Latium; and they drifted, Heaven-impelled,

Year after year, o’er many an unknown sea—

O labor vast, to found the Roman line!

Below th’ horizon the Sicilian isle ⁠50

Just sank from view, as for the open sea

With heart of hope they said, and every ship

Clove with its brazen beak the salt, white waves.

But Juno of her everlasting wound

Knew no surcease, but from her heart of pain ⁠55

Thus darkly mused: “Must I, defeated, fail

“Of what I will, nor turn the Teucrian King

“From Italy away? Can Fate oppose?

“Had Pallas power to lay waste in flame

“The Argive fleet and sink its mariners, ⁠60

“Revenging but the sacrilege obscene

“By Ajax wrought, Oïleus’ desperate son?

“She, from the clouds, herself Jove’s lightning threw,

“Scattered the ships, and ploughed the sea with storms.

“Her foe, from his pierced breast out-breathing fire, ⁠65

“In whirlwind on a deadly rock she flung.

“But I, who move among the gods a queen,

“Jove’s sister and his spouse, with one weak tribe

“Make war so long! Who now on Juno calls?

“What suppliant gifts henceforth her altars crown?” ⁠70



So, in her fevered heart complaining still,

Unto the storm-cloud land the goddess came,

A region with wild whirlwinds in its womb,

Æolia named, where royal Æolus

In a high-vaulted cavern keeps control ⁠75

O’er warring winds and loud concoùrse of storms.

There closely pent in chains and bastions strong,

They, scornful, make the vacant mountain roar,

Chafing against their bonds. But from a throne

Of lofty crag, their king with sceptred hand ⁠80

Allays their fury and their rage confines.

Did he not so, our ocean, earth, and sky

Were whirled before them through the vast inane.

But over-ruling Jove, of this in fear,

Hid them in dungeon dark: then o’er them piled ⁠85

Huge mountains, and ordained a lawful king

To hold them in firm sway, or know what time,

With Jove’s consent, to loose them o’er the world.



To him proud Juno thus made lowly plea:

“Thou in whose hands the Father of all gods ⁠90

“And Sovereign of mankind confides the power

“To calm the waters or with winds upturn,

“Great Æolus! a race with me at war

“Now sails the Tuscan main towards Italy,

“Bringing their Ilium and its vanquished powers. ⁠95

“Uprouse thy gales! Strike that proud navy down!

“Hurl far and wide, and strew the waves with dead!

“Twice seven nymphs are mine, of rarest mould,

“Of whom Deïopea, the most fair,

“I give thee in true wedlock for thine own, ⁠100

“To mate thy noble worth; she at thy side

“Shall pass long, happy years, and fruitful bring

“Her beauteous offspring unto thee their sire.”

Then Æolus: “’T is thy sole task, O Queen

“To weigh thy wish and will. My fealty ⁠105

“Thy high behest obeys. This humble throne

“Is of thy gift. Thy smiles for me obtain

“Authority from Jove. Thy grace concedes

“My station at your bright Olympian board,

“And gives me lordship of the darkening storm.” ⁠110

Replying thus, he smote with spear reversed

The hollow mountain’s wall; then rush the winds

Through that wide breach in long, embattled line,

And sweep tumultuous from land to land:

With brooding pinions o’er the waters spread ⁠115

East wind and south, and boisterous Afric gale

Upturn the sea; vast billows shoreward roll;

The shout of mariners, the creak of cordage,

Follow the shock; low-hanging clouds conceal

From Trojan eyes all sight of heaven and day; ⁠120

Night o’er the ocean broods; from sky to sky

The thunder roll, the ceaseless lightnings glare;

And all things mean swift death for mortal man.



Straightway Æneas, shuddering with amaze,

Groaned loud, upraised both holy hands to Heaven, ⁠125

And thus did plead: “O thrice and four times blest,

“Ye whom your sires and whom the walls of Troy

“Looked on in your last hour! O bravest son

“Greece ever bore, Tydides! O that I

“Had fallen on Ilian fields, and given this life ⁠130

“Struck down by thy strong hand! where by the spear

“Of great Achilles, fiery Hector fell,

“And huge Sarpedon; where the Simois

“In furious flood engulfed and whirled away

“So many helms and shields and heroes slain!” ⁠135

While thus he cried to Heaven, a shrieking blast

Smote full upon the sail. Up surged the waves

To strike the very stars; in fragments flew

The shattered oars; the helpless vessel veered

And gave her broadside to the roaring flood, ⁠140

Where watery mountains rose and burst and fell.

Now high in air she hangs, then yawning gulfs

Lay bare the shoals and sand o’er which she drives.

Three ships a whirling south wind snatched and flung

On hidden rocks,—altars of sacrifice ⁠145

Italians call them, which lie far from shore

A vast ridge in the sea; three ships beside

An east wind, blowing landward from the deep,

Drove on the shallows,—pitiable sight,—

And girdled them in walls of drifting sand. ⁠150

That ship, which, with his friend Orontes, bore

The Lycian mariners, a great, plunging wave

Struck straight astern, before Æneas’ eyes.

Forward the steersman rolled and o’er the side

Fell headlong, while three times the circling flood ⁠155

Spun the light bark through swift engulfing seas.

Look, how the lonely swimmers breast the wave!

And on the waste of waters wide are seen

Weapons of war, spars, planks, and treasures rare,

Once Ilium’s boast, all mingled with the storm. ⁠160

Now o’er Achates and Ilioneus,

Now o’er the ship of Abas or Aletes,

Bursts the tempestuous shock; their loosened seams

Yawn wide and yield the angry wave its will.



Meanwhile, how all his smitten ocean moaned, ⁠165

And how the tempest’s turbulent assault

Had vexed the stillness of his deepest cave,

Great Neptune knew; and with indignant mien

Uplifted o’er the sea his sovereign brow.

He saw the Teucrian navy scattered far ⁠170

Along the waters; and Æneas’ men

O’erwhelmed in mingling shock of wave and sky.

Saturnian Juno’s vengeful stratagem

Her brother’s royal glance failed not to see;

And loud to eastward and to westward calling, ⁠175

He voiced this word: “What pride of birth or power

“Is yours, ye winds, that, reckless of my will,

“Audacious thus, ye ride through earth and heaven,

“And stir these mountain waves? Such rebels I—

“Nay, first I calm this tumult! But yourselves ⁠180

“By heavier chastisement shall expiate

“Hereafter your bold trespass. Haste away

“And bear your king this word! Not unto him

“Dominion o’er the seas and trident dread,

“But unto mind, Fate gives. Let him possess ⁠185

“Wild mountain crags, thy favored haunt and home,

“O Eurus! In his barbarous mansion there,

“Let Æolus look proud, and play the king

“In yon close-bounded prison-house of storms!”



He spoke, and swiftlier than his word subdued ⁠190

The swelling of the floods; dispersed afar

Th’ assembled clouds, and brought back light to heaven.

Cymothoë then and Triton, with huge toil,

Thrust down the vessels from the sharp-edged reef;

While, with the trident, the great god’s own hand ⁠195

Assists the task; then, from the sand-strewn shore

Out-ebbing far, he calms the whole wide sea,

And glides light-wheeled along the crested foam.

As when, with not unwonted tumult, roars

In some vast city a rebellious mob, ⁠200

And base-born passions in its bosom burn,

Till rocks and blazing torches fill the air

(Rage never lacks for arms)—if haply then

Some wise man comes, whose reverend looks attest

A life to duty given, swift silence falls; ⁠205

All ears are turned attentive; and he sways

With clear and soothing speech the people’s will.

So ceased the sea’s uproar, when its grave Sire

Looked o’er th’ expanse, and, riding on in light,

Flung free rein to his winged obedient car. ⁠210



Æneas’ wave-worn crew now landward made,

And took the nearest passage, whither lay

The coast of Libya. A haven there

Walled in by bold sides of a rocky isle,

Offers a spacious and secure retreat, ⁠215

Where every billow from the distant main

Breaks, and in many a rippling curve retires.

Huge crags and two confronted promontories

Frown heaven-high, beneath whose brows outspread

The silent, sheltered waters; on the heights ⁠220

the bright and glimmering foliage seems to show

A woodland amphitheatre; and yet higher

Rises a straight-stemmed grove of dense, dark shade.

Fronting on these a grotto may be seen,

O’erhung by steep cliffs; from its inmost wall ⁠225

Clear springs gush out; and shelving seats it has

Of unhewn stone, a place the wood-nymphs love.

In such a port, a weary ship rides free

Of weight of firm-fluked anchor or strong chain.

Hither Æneas, of his scattered fleet ⁠230

Saving but seven, into harbor sailed;

With passionate longing for the touch of land,

Forth leapt the Trojans to the welcome shore,

And fling their dripping limbs along the ground.

Then good Achates smote a flinty stone, ⁠235

Secured a flashing spark, heaped on light leaves,

And with dry branches nursed the mounting flame.

Then Ceres’ gift from the corrupting sea

They bring away; and wearied utterly

Ply Ceres’ cunning on the rescued corn, ⁠240

And parch in flames, and mill ’twixt two smooth stones.



Æneas meanwhile climbed the cliffs, and searched

The wide sea-prospect; haply Antheus there,

Storm-buffeted, might sail with his ken,

With biremes, and his Phrygian mariners, ⁠245

Or Capys or Caïcus armor-clad,

Upon a towering deck. No ship is seen;

But while he looks, three stags along the shore

Come straying by, and close behind them comes

The whole herd, browsing through the lowland vale ⁠250

In one long line. Æneas stopped and seized

His bow and swift-winged arrows, which his friend,

Trusty Achates, close beside him bore.

His first shafts brought to earth the lordly heads

Of the high-antlered chiefs; his next assailed ⁠255

The general herd, and drove them one and all

In panic through the leafy wood, nor ceased

The victory of his bow, till on the ground

Lay seven huge forms, one gift for every ship.

Then back to shore he sped, and to his friends ⁠260

Distributed the spoil, with that rare wine

Which good Acestes erst in Sicily

Had stored in jars, and prince-like sent away

With his loved guest;—this too Æneas gave;

And with these words their mournful mood consoled. ⁠265



“Companions mine, we have not failed to feel

“Calamity till now. O, ye have borne

“Far heavier sorrow: Jove will make an end

“Also of this. Ye sailed a course hard by

“Infuriate Scylla’s howling cliffs and caves. ⁠270

“Ye knew the Cyclops’ crags. Lift up your hearts!

“No more complaint and fear! It well may be

“Some happier hour will find this memory fair.

“Through chance and change and hazard without end,

“Our goal is Latium; where our destinies ⁠275

“Beckon to blest abodes, and have ordained

“That Troy shall rise new-born! Have patience all!

“And bide expectantly that golden day.”

Such was his word, but vexed with grief and care,

Feigned hopes upon his forehead firm he wroe, ⁠280

And locked within his heart a hero’s pain.



Now round the welcome trophies of his chase

They gather for a feast. Some flay the ribs

And bare the flesh below; some slice with knives,

And on keen prongs the quivering strips impale, ⁠285

Place cauldrons on the shore, and fan the fires.

Then, stretched at ease on couch of simple green,

They rally their lost powers, and feast them well

On seasoned wine and succulent haunch of game.



But hunger banished and the banquet done, ⁠290

In long discourse of their lost mates they tell,

’Twixt hopes and fears divided; for who knows

Whether the lost ones live, or strive with death,

Or heed no more whatever voice may call?

Chiefly Æneas now bewails his friends, ⁠295

Orontes brave and fallen Amycus,

Or mourns with grief untold the untimely doom

Of bold young Gyas and Cloanthus bold.



After these things were past, exalted Jove,

From his ethereal sky surveying clear ⁠300

The seas all winged with sails, lands widely spread,

And nations populous from shore to shore,

Paused on the peak of heaven, and fixed his gaze

On Libya. But while he anxious mused,

Near him, her radiant eyes all dim with tears, ⁠305

Nor smiling any more, Venus approached,

And thus complained: “O thou who dost control

“Things human and divine by changeless laws,

“Enthroned in awful thunder! What huge wrong

“Could my Æneas and his Trojans few ⁠310

“Achieve against thy power? For they have borne

“Unnumbered deaths, and, failing Italy,

“The gates of all the world against them close.

“Hast thou not given us thy covenant

“That hence the Romans when the rolling years ⁠315

“Have come full cycle, shall arise to power

“From Troy’s regenerate seed, and rule supreme

“The unresisted lords of land and sea?

“O Sire, what swerves thy will? How oft have I

“In Troy’s most lamentable wreck and woe ⁠320

“Consoled my heart with this, and balanced oft

“Our destined good against our destined ill!

“But the same stormful fortune still pursues

“My band of heroes on their perilous way.

“When shall these labors cease, O glorious King? ⁠325

“Antenor, though th’ Achæans pressed his sore,

“Found his way forth, and entered unassailed

“Illyria’s haven, and the guarded land

“Of the Liburni. Straight up stream he said

“Where like a swollen sea Timavus pours ⁠330

“A nine-fold flood from roaring mountain gorge,

“And whelms with voiceful wave the fields below.

“He built Patavium there, and fixed abodes

“For Troy’s far-exiled sons; he gave a name

“To a new land and race; the Trojan arms ⁠335

“Were hung on temple walls; and, to this day,

“Lying in perfect peace, the hero sleeps.

“But we of thine own seed, to whom thou dost

“A station in the arch of heaven assign,

“Behold our navy vilely wrecked, because ⁠340

“A single god is angry; we endure

“This treachery and violence, whereby

“Wide seas divide us from th’ Hesperian shore.

“Is this what piety receives? Or thus

“Doth Heaven’s decree restore our fallen thrones?” ⁠345

Smiling reply, the Sire of gods and men

With such a look as clears the skies of storm,

Chastely his daughter kissed, and thus spake on:

“Let Cytherea cast her fears away!

“Irrevocably blest the fortunes be ⁠350

“Of thee and thine. Nor shalt thou fail to see

“That City, and the proud predestined wall

“Encompassing Lavinium. Thyself

“Shall starward to the heights of heaven bear

“Æneas the great-hearted. Nothing serves ⁠355

“My will once uttered. Since such carking cares

“Consume thee, I this hour speak freely forth,

“And leaf by leaf the book of fate unfold.

“Thy son in Italy shall wage vast war

“And quell its nations wild; his city-wall ⁠360

“And sacred laws shall be a mighty bond

“About his gathered people. Summers three

“Shall Lavinium call him king; and three times pass

“The winter o’er Rutulia’s vanquished hills.

“His heir, Ascanius, now Iulus called ⁠365

“(Ilus it was while Ilium’s kingdom stood),

“Full thirty months shall reign, then move the throne

“From the Lavinian citadel, and build

“For Alba Longa its well-bastioned wall.

“Here three full centuries shall Hector’s race ⁠370

“Have kingly power; till a priestess queen,

“By Mars conceiving, her twin offspring bear;

“Then Romulus, wolf-nursed and proudly clad

“In tawny wolf-skin mantle, shall receive

“The sceptre of his race. He shall uprear ⁠375

“The war-god’s citadel and lofty wall,

“And on his Romans his own name bestow.

“To these I give no bounded times or power,

“But empire without end. Yea, even my Queen,

“Juno, who now chastiseth land and sea ⁠380

“With her dread frown, will find a wiser way,

“And at my sovereign side protect and bless

“The Romans, masters of the whole round world,

“Who, clad in peaceful toga, judge mankind.

“Such my decree! In lapse of seasons due, ⁠385

“The heirs of Ilium’s kings shall bind in chains

“Mycenæ’s glory and Achilles’ towers,

“And over prostrate Argos sit supreme.

“Of Trojan stock illustriously sprung,

“Lo, Cæsar comes! whose power the ocean bounds, ⁠390

“Whose fame, the skies. He shall receive the name

“Iulus nobly bore, great Julius, he.

“Him to the skies, in Orient trophies dight,

“Thou shalt with smiles receive; and he, like us,

“Shall hear at his own shrines the suppliant vow. ⁠395

“Then will the world grow mild; the battle-sound

“Will be forgot; for olden Honor then,

“With spotless Vesta, and the brothers twain,

“Remus and Romulus, at strife no more,

“Will publish sacred laws. The dreadful gates ⁠400

“Whence issueth war, shall with close-jointed steel

“Be barred impregnably; and prisoned there

“The heaven-offending Fury, throned on swords,

“And fettered by a hundred brazen chains,

“Shall belch vain curses from his lips of gore.” ⁠405

These words he gave, and summoned Maia’s son,

The herald Mercury, who earthward flying,

Should bid the Tyrian realms and new-built towers

Welcome the Trojan waifs; lest Dido, blind

To Fate’s decree, should thrust him from the land. ⁠410

He takes his flight, with rhythmic stroke of wing,

Across th’ abyss of air, and soon draws near

Unto the Libyan mainland. He fulfils

His heavenly task; the Punic hearts of stone

Grow soft beneath the effluence divine; ⁠415

And, most of all, the Queen, with heart at ease,

Awaits benignantly her guests from Troy.



But good Æneas, pondering all night long

His many cares, when first the cheerful dawn

Upon him broke, resolved to take survey ⁠420

Of this strange country whither wind and wave

Had driven him,—for desert land it seemed,—

To learn what tribes of man or beast possess

A place so wild, and careful tidings bring

Back to his friends. His fleet of ships the while, ⁠425

Where dense, dark groves o’er-arch a hollowed crag,

He left encircled in far-branching shade.

Then with no followers save his trusty friend

Achates, he went forth upon his way,

Two broad-tipped javelins poising in his hand. ⁠430

Deep to the midmost wood he went, and there

His Mother in his path uprose; she seemed

In garp and countenance a maid, and bore,

Like Spartan maids, a weapon; in such guise

Harpalyce the Thracian urges on ⁠435

Her panting coursers and in wild career

Outstrips impetuous Hebrus as it flower.

Over her lovely shoulders was a bow,

Slender and light, as fits a huntress fair;

Her golden tresses without wimple moved ⁠440

In every wind, and girded in a knot

Her undulant vesture bared her marble knees.

She hailed them thus: “Ho, sirs, I pray you tell

“If haply ye have noted, as ye came,

“One of my sisters in this wood astray? ⁠445

“She bore a quiver, and a lynx’s hide

“Her spotted mantle was; perchance she roused

“Some foaming boar, and chased with a loud halloo.”



So Venus spoke, and Venus’ son replied:

“No voice or vision of thy sister fair ⁠450

“Has crossed my path, thou maid without a name!

“Thy beauty seems not of terrestrial mould,

“Nor is thy music mortal! Tell me, goddess,

“Art thou bring Phœbus’ sister? Or some nymph,

“The daughter of a god? Whate’er thou art, ⁠455

“Thy favor we implore, and potent aid

“In our vast toil. Instruct us of what skies,

“Or what world’s end, our storm-swept lives have found!

“Strange are these lands and people where we rove,

“Compelled by wind and wave. Lo, this right hand ⁠460

“Shall many a victim on thine altars slay!”



Then Venus: “Nay, I boast not to receive

“Honors divine. We Tyrian virgins oft

“Bear bow and quiver, and our ankles white

“Lace up in purple buskin. Yonder lies ⁠465

“The Punic power, where Tyrian masters hold

“Agenor’s town; but on its borders dwell

“The Libyans, by battles unsubdued.

“Upon the throne is Dido, exiled there

“From Tyre, to flee th’ unnatural enmity ⁠470

“Of her own brother. ’T was an ancient wrong;

“Too long the dark and tangled tale would be;

“I trace the larger outline of her story;

“Sichæus was her spouse, whose acres broad

“No Tyrian lord could match, and he was blessed ⁠475

“By his ill-fated lady’s fondest love,

“Whose father gave him her first virgin bloom

“In youthful marriage. But the kingly power

“Among the Tyrians to her brother came,

“Pygmalion, none deeper dyed in crime ⁠480

“In all that land. Betwixt these twain there rose

“A deadly hatred, and the impious wretch,

“Blinded by greed, and reckless utterly

“Of his fond sister’s joy, did murder foul

“Upon defenceless and unarmed Sichæus, ⁠485

“And at that very altar hewed him down.

“Long did he hide the deed, and guilefully

“Deceived with false hopes, and fair glozing words,

“Her grief and stricken love. But as she slept,

“Her husband’s tombless ghost before her came, ⁠490

“With face all wondrous pale, and he laid bare

“His heart with dagger pierced, disclosing so

“The blood-stained altar and the infamy

“That darkened now their house. His counsel was

“To fly, self-banished, from her ruined land. ⁠495

“And for her journey’s aid, he whispered where

“His buried treasure lay, a weight unknown

“Of silver and of gold. Thus onward urged,

“Dido, assembling her few trusted friends,

“Prepared her flight. There rallied to her cause ⁠500

“All who did hate and scorn the tyrant king,

“Or feared his cruelty. They seized his ships,

“Which haply rode at anchor in the bay,

“And loaded them with gold; the hoarded wealth

“Of vile and covetous Pygmalion ⁠505

“They took to sea. A woman wrought this deed.

“Then came they to these lands where now thine eyes

“Behold yon walls and yonder citadel

“Of newly rising Carthage. For a price

“They measured round so much of Afric soil ⁠510

“As one bull’s hide encircles, and the spot

“Received its name, the Byrsa. But, I pray,

“What men are ye? from what far land arrived,

“And whither going?”

⁠When she questioned thus,

Her son, with sighs that rose from his heart’s depths, ⁠515

This answer gave: “Divine one, if I tell

“My woes and burdens all, and thou could’st pause

“To heed the tale, first would the vesper star

“Th’ Olympian portals close, and bid the day

“In slumber lie. Of ancient Troy are we— ⁠520

“If aught of Troy thou knowest! As we roved

“From sea to sea, the hazard of the storm

“Cast us up hither on this Libyan coast.

“I am Æneas, faithful evermore

“To Heaven’s command; and in my ships I bear ⁠525

“My gods ancestral, which I snatched away

“From peril of the foe. My fame is known

“Above the stars. I travel on in quest

“Of Italy, my true home-land, and I

“From Jove himself may trace my birth divine. ⁠530

“With twice ten ships upon the Phrygian main

“I launched away. My mother from the skies

“Gave guidance, and I wrought what Fate ordained.

“Yet now scarce seven shattered ships survive

“The shock of wind and wave; and I myself ⁠535

“Friendless, bereft, am wandering up and down

“This Libyan wilderness! Behold me here,

“From Europe and from Asia exiled still!”



But Venus could not let him longer plain,

And stopped his grief midway:

⁠“Whoe’er thou art, ⁠540

“I deem that not unblest of heavenly powers,

“With vital breath still thine, thou comest hither

“Unto our Tyrian town. Go steadfast on,

“And to the royal threshold make thy way!

“I bring thee tidings that thy comrades all ⁠545

“Are safe at land; and all thy ships, conveyed

“By favoring breezes, safe at anchor lie;

“Or else in vain my parents gave me skill

“To read the skies. Look up at yonder swans!

“A flock of twelve, whose gayly fluttering file, ⁠550

“Erst scattered by Jove’s eagle swooping down

“From his ethereal haunt, now form anew

“Their long-drawn line, and make a landing-place,

“Or, hovering over, scan some chosen ground,

“Or soaring high, with whir of happy wings, ⁠555

“Re-circle heaven in triumphant song:

“Likewise, I tell thee, thy lost mariners

“Are landed, or fly landward at full sail.

“Up, then! let yon plain thy guidance be.”



She ceased and turned away. A roseate beam ⁠560

From her bright shoulder glowed; th’ ancestral hair

Breathed more than mortal sweetness, while her robes

Fell rippling to her feet. Each step revealed

The veritable goddess. Now he knew

That vision was his mother, and his words ⁠565

Pursued the fading phantom as it fled:

“Why is thy son deluded o’er and o’er

“With mocking dreams,—another cruel god?

“Hast thou no hand-clasp true, nor interchange

“Of words unfeigned betwixt this heart and thine?” ⁠570

Such word of blame he spoke, and took his way

Toward the city’s rampart.

⁠Venus then

O’erveiled them as they moved in darkened air,—

A liquid mantle of thick cloud divine,—

That viewless they might pass, nor any wight ⁠575

Obstruct, delay, or question why they came.

To Paphos then she soared, her loved abode,

Where stands her temple, at whose hundred shrines

Garlands of myrtle and fresh roses breathe,

And clouds of orient sweetness waft away. ⁠580



Meanwhile the wanderers swiftly journey on

Along the clear-marked road, and soon they climb

The brow of a high hill, which close in view

O’er-towers the city’s crown. The vast exploit,

Where lately rose but Afric cabins rude, ⁠585

Æneas wondered at: the smooth, wide ways;

The bastioned gates; the uproar of the throng.

The Tyrians toil unwearied; some up-raise

A wall or citadel, from far below

Lifting the ponderous stone; or with due care ⁠590

Choose where to build, and close the space around

With sacred furrow; in their gathering-place

The people for just governors, just laws,

And for their reverend senate shout acclaim.

Some clear the harbor mouth; some deeply lay ⁠595

The base of a great theatre, and carve out

Proud columns from the mountain, to adorn

Their rising stage with lofty ornament.



So busy bees above a field of flowers

In early summer amid sunbeams toil, ⁠600

Leading abroad their nation’s youthful brood;

Or with the flowering honey storing close

The pliant cells, until they quite run o’er

With nectared sweet; while from the entering swarm

They take their little loads; or lined for war, ⁠605

Rout the dull drones, and chase them from the hive;

Brisk is the task, and all the honeyed air

Breathes odors of wild thyme.

⁠“How blest of Heaven,

“These men that see their promised ramparts rise!”

Æneas sighed; and swift his glances moved ⁠610

From tower to tower; then on his way he fared,

Veiled in the wonder-cloud, whence all unseen

Of human eyes,—O strange the tale and true!—

He threaded the thronged streets, unmarked, unknown.



Deep in the city’s heart there was a grove ⁠615

Of beauteous shade, where once the Tyrians,

Cast here by stormful waves, delved out of earth

That portent which Queen Juno bade them find,—

The head of a proud horse,—that ages long

Their boast might be wealth, luxury and war. ⁠620

Upon this spot Sidonian Dido raised

A spacious fane to Juno, which became

Splendid with gifts, and hallowed far and wide

For potency divine. Its beams were bronze,

And on loud hinges swung the brazen doors. ⁠625

A rare, new sight this sacred grove did show,

Which calmed Æneas’ fears, and made him bold

To hope for safety, and with lifted heart

From his low-fallen fortunes re-aspire.

For while he waits the advent of the Queen, ⁠630

He scans the mighty temple, and admires

The city’s opulent pride, and all the skill

Its rival craftsmen in their work approve.

Behold! he sees old Ilium’s well-fought fields

In sequent picture, and those famous wars ⁠635

Now told upon men’s lips the whole world round.

There Atreus’ sons, there kingly Priam moved,

And fierce Pelides pitiless to both.

Æneas paused, and, weeping, thus began:

“Alas, Achates, what far region now, ⁠640

“What land in all the world knows not our pain?

“See, it is Priam! Virtue’s wage is given—

“O even here! Here also there be tears

“For what men bear, and mortal creatures feel

“Each other’s sorrow. Therefore, have no fear! ⁠645

“This story of our loss forbodes us well.”



So saying, he received into his heart

That visionary scene, profoundly sighed,

And let his plenteous tears unheeded flow.

There he beheld the citadel of Troy ⁠650

Girt with embattled foes; here, Greeks in flight

Some Trojan onset ’scaped; there, Phrygian bands

Before tall-plumed Achilles’ chariot sped.

The snowy tents of Rhesus spread hard by

(He sees them through his tears), where Diomed ⁠655

In night’s first watch burst o’er them unawares

With bloody havoc and a host of deaths;

Then drove his fiery coursers o’er the plain

Before their thirst or hunger could be stayed

On Trojan corn or Xanthus’ cooling stream. ⁠660

Here too was princely Troilus, despoiled,

Routed and weaponless, O wretched boy!

Ill-matched against Achilles! His wild steeds

Bear him along, as from his chariot’s rear

He falls far back, but clutches still the rein; ⁠665

His hair and shoulders on the ground go trailing,

And his down-pointing spear-head scrawls the dust.

Elsewhere, to Pallas’ ever-hostile shrine

Daughters of Ilium, with unsnooded hair,

And lifting all in vain her hallowed pall, ⁠670

Walked suppliant and sad, beating their breasts,

With outspread palms. But her unswerving eyes

The goddess fixed on earth, and would not see.

Achilles round the Trojan rampart thrice

Had dragged the fallen Hector, and for gold ⁠675

Was making traffic of the lifeless clay.

Æneas groaned aloud, with bursting heart,

To see the spoils, the car, the very corpse

Of his lost friend,—while Priam for the dead

Stretched forth in piteous prayer his helpless hands. ⁠680

There too his own presentment he could see

Surrounded by Greek kings; and there were shown

Hordes from the East, and black-browed Memnon’s arms;

Her band of Amazons, with moon-shaped shields,

Penthesilea led; her martial eye ⁠685

Flamed on from troop to troop; a belt of gold

Beneath one bare, protruded breast she bound—

A warrior-virgin braving mail-clad men.



While on such spectacle Æneas’ eyes

Looked wondering, while mute and motionless ⁠690

He stood at gaze, Queen Dido to the shrine

In lovely majesty drew near; a throng

Of youthful followers pressed round her way.

So by the margin of Eurotas wide

Or o’er the Cynthian steep, Diana leads ⁠695

Her bright processional; hither and yon

Are visionary legions numberless

Of Oreads; the regnant goddess bears

A quiver on her shoulders, and is seen

Emerging tallest of her beauteous train; ⁠700

While joy unutterable thrills the breast

Of fond Latona: Dido not less fair

Amid her subjects passed, and not less bright

Her glow of gracious joy, while she approved

Her future kingdom’s pomp and vast emprise. ⁠705

Then at the sacred portal and beneath

The temple’s vaulted dome she took her place,

Encompassed by armed men, and lifted high

Upon a throne; her statutes and decrees

The people heard, and took what lot or toil ⁠710

Her sentence, or impartial urn, assigned.

But, lo! Æneas sees among the throng

Antheus, Sergestus, and Cloanthus bold,

With other Teucrians, whom the black storm flung

Far o’er the deep and drove on alien shores. ⁠715

Struck dumb was he, and good Achates too,

Half gladness and half fear. Fain would they fly

To friendship’s fond embrace; but knowing not

What might befall, their hearts felt doubt and care.

Therefore they kept the secret, and remained ⁠720

Forth-peering from the hollow veil of cloud,

Haply to learn what their friends’ fate might be,

Or where the fleet was landed, or what aim

Had brought them hither; for a chosen few

From every ship had come to sue for grace, ⁠725

And all the temple with their voices rang.

The doors swung wide; and after access given

And leave to speak, revered Ilioneus

With soul serene these lowly words essayed:

“O Queen, who hast authority of Jove ⁠730

“To found this raising city, and subdue

“With righteous governance its people proud,

“We wretched Trojans, blown from sea to sea,

“Beseech thy mercy; keep the curse of fire

“From our poor ships! We pray thee, do no wrong ⁠735

“Unto a guileless race. But heed our plea!

“No Libyan hearth shall suffer by our sword,

“Nor spoil and plunder to our ships be borne;

“Such haughty violence fits not the souls

“Of vanquished men. We journey to a land ⁠740

“Named, in Greek syllables, Hesperia:

“A storied realm, made mighty by great wars

“And wealth of fruitful glebe; in former days

“Œnotrians had it, and their sons, ’t is said,

“Have called it Italy, a chieftain’s name ⁠745

“To a whole region given. Thitherward

“Our ships did fare; but with swift-rising flood

“The stormful season of Orion’s star

“Drove us on viewless shoals; and angry gales

“Dispersed us, smitten by the tumbling surge, ⁠750

“Among innavigable rocks. Behold,

“We few swam hither, waifs upon your shore!

“What race of mortals this? What barbarous land,

“That with inhospitable laws ye thrust

“A stranger from your coasts, and fly to arms, ⁠755

“Nor grant mere foothold on your kingdom’s bound?

“If man thou scornest and all mortal power,

“Forget not that the gods watch good and ill!

“A king we had, Æneas,—never man

“In all the world more loyal, just and true, ⁠760

“Nor mightier in arms! If Heaven decree

“His present safety, if he now do breathe

“The air of earth and is not buried low

“Among the dreadful shades, then fear not thou!

“For thou wilt never rue that thou wert prompt ⁠765

“To do us the first kindness. O’er the sea

“In the Sicilian land, are cities proud,

“With martial power, and great Acestes there

“Is of our Trojan kin. So grant us here

“To beach our shattered ships along thy shore, ⁠770

“And from thy forest bring us beam and spar

“To mend our broken oars. Then, if perchance

“We find once more our comrades and our king,

“And forth to Italy once more set sail,

“To Italy, our Latin hearth and home, ⁠775

“We will rejoicing go. But if our weal

“Is clean gone by, and thee, blest chief and sire,

“These Libyan waters keep, and if no more

“Iulus bids us hope,—then, at the least,

“To yon Sicilian seas, to friendly lands ⁠780

“Whence hither drifting with the winds we came,

“Let us retrace the journey and rejoin

“Good King Acestes.”

⁠So Ilioneus

Ended his pleading; the Dardaniæ

Murmured assent. ⁠785

Then Dido, briefly and with downcast eyes,

Her answer made: “O Teucrians, have no fear!

“Bid care begone! It was necessity,

“And my young kingdom’s weakness, which compelled

“The policy of force, and made me keep ⁠790

“Such vigilant sentry my wide coast along.

“Æneas and his people, that fair town

“Of Troy—who knows them not? The whole world knows

“Those valorous chiefs and huge, far-flaming wars.

“Our Punic hearts are not of substance all ⁠795

“Insensible and full: the god of day

“Drives not his fire-breathing steeds so far

“From this our Tyrian town. If ye would go

“To great Hesperia, where Saturn reigned,

“Or if voluptuous Eryx and the throne ⁠800

“Of good Acestes be your journey’s end,

“I send you safe; I speed you on your way.

“But if in these my realms ye will abide,

“Associates of my power, behold, I build

“This city for your own! Choose haven here ⁠805

“For your good ships. Beneath my royal sway

“Trojan and Tyrian equal grace will find.

“But O, that this same storm had brought your King,

“Æneas, hither! I will bid explore

“Our Libya’s utmost bound, where haply he ⁠810

“In wilderness or hamlet wanders lost.”



By these fair words to joy profoundly stirred,

Father Æneas and Achates brave

To cast aside the cloud that wrapped them round

Yearned greatly; and Achates to his King ⁠815

Spoke thus: “O goddess-born, in thy wise heart

“What purpose rises now? Lo! All is well!

“Thy fleet and followers are safe at land.

“One only comes not, who before our eyes

“Sank in the soundless sea. All else fulfils ⁠820

“Thy mother’s prophecy.”

⁠Scarce had he spoke

When suddenly that overmantling cloud

Was cloven, and dissolved in lucent air;

Forth stood Æneas. A clear sunbeam smote

His god-like head and shoulders. Venus’ son ⁠825

Of his own heavenly mother now received

Youth’s glowing rose, an eye of joyful fire,

And tresses clustering fair. ’T is even so

The cunning craftsman unto ivory gives

New beauty, or with circlet of bright gold ⁠830

Encloses silver or the Parian stone.



Thus of the Queen he sued, while wonderment

Fell on all hearts. “Behold the man ye seek,

“For I am here! Æneas, Trojan-born,

“Brought safely hither from yon Libyan seas! ⁠835

“O thou who first hast looked with pitying eye

“On Troy’s unutterable grief, who even to us

“(Escaped our Grecian victor, and outworn

“By all the perils land and ocean know),

“To us, bereft and ruined, dost extend ⁠840

“Such welcome to thy kingdom and thy home!

“I have no power, Dido, to give thanks

“To match thine ample grace; nor is there power

“In any remnant of our Dardan blood,

“Now fled in exile o’er the whole wide world. ⁠845

“May gods on high (if influence divine

“Bless faithful lives, or recompense be found

“In justice and thy self-approving mind)

“Give thee thy guerdon due. What age was blest

“By such a birth as thine? What parents proud ⁠850

“Such offspring bore? O, while the rivers run

“To mingle with the sea, while shadows pass

“Along yon rounded hills from vale to vale,

“And while from heaven’s unextinguished fire

“The stars be fed—so long thy glorious name ⁠855

“Thy place illustrious and thy virtue’s praise,

“Abide undimmed.—Yet I myself must go

“To lands I know not where.”

⁠After this word

His right hand clasped his loved Ilioneus,

His left Serestus; then the comrades all, ⁠860

Brave Gyas, brave Cloanthus, and their peers.

Sidonian Dido felt her heart stand still

When first she looked on him; and thrilled again

To hear what vast adventure had befallen

So great a hero. Thus she welcomed him: ⁠865

“What chance, O goddess-born, o’er danger’s path

“Impels? What power to this wild coast has borne?

“Art thou Æneas, great Anchises’ son,

“Whom the lovely Venus by the Phrygian stream

“Of Simois brought forth unto the day? ⁠870

“Now I bethink me of when Teucer came

“To Sidon, exiled, and of Belus’ power

“Desired a second throne. For Belus then,

“Our worshipped sire, despoiled the teeming land

“Of Cyprus, as its conqueror and king. ⁠875

“And since that hour I oft have heard the tale

“Of fallen Troy, of thine own noble name,

“And of Achæan kings. Teucer was wont,

“Although their foe, to praise the Teucrian race,

“And boasted him of that proud lineage sprung. ⁠880

“Therefore, behold, our portals are swung wide

“For all your company. I also bore

“Hard fate like thine. I too was driven of storms

“And after long toil was allowed at last

“To call this land my home. O, I am wise ⁠885

“In sorrow, and I help all suffering souls!”



So saying, she bade Æneas welcome take

Beneath her royal roof, and to the gods

Made sacrifice in temples, while she sent

Unto the thankful Trojans on the shore ⁠890

A score of bulls, and of huge, bristling swine,

A herd of a whole hundred, and a flock

Of goodly lambs, a hundred, who ran close

Beside the mother-ewes: and all were given

In joyful feast to please the Heavenly Powers. ⁠895



Her palace showed a monarch’s fair array

All glittering and proud, and feasts were spread

Within the ample court. Rich broideries

Hung deep incarnadined with Tyrian skill;

The board had massy silver, gold-embossed, ⁠900

Where gleamed the mighty deeds of all her sires,

A graven chronicle of peace and war

Prolonged, since first her ancient line began,

From royal sire to son.

⁠Æneas now

(For love in his paternal heart spoke loud ⁠905

And gave no rest) bade swift Achates run

To tell Ascanius all, and from the ship

To guide him upward to the town,—for now

The father’s whole heart for Ascanius yearned.

And gifts he bade them bring, which had been saved ⁠910

In Ilium’s fall: a richly broidered cloak

Heavy with golden emblems; and a veil

By leaves of saffron lilies bordered round,

Which Argive Helen o’er her beauty threw,

Her mother Leda’s gift most wonderful, ⁠915

And which to Troy she bore, when flying far

In lawless wedlock from Mycenæ’s towers;

A sceptre, too, once fair Ilione’s,

Eldest of Priam’s daughters; and round pearls

Strung in a necklace, and a double crown ⁠920

Of jewels set in gold. These gifts to find,

Achates to the tall ships sped away.



But Cytherea in her heart revolved

New wiles, new schemes: how Cupid should transform

His countenance, and, coming in the guise ⁠925

Of sweet Ascanius, still more inflame

The amorous Queen with gifts, and deeply fuse

Through all her yielding frame his fatal fire.

Sooth, Venus feared the many-languaged guile

Which Tyrians use; fierce Juno’s hate she feared, ⁠930

And falling night renewed her sleepless care.

Therefore to Love, the light-winged god, she said:

“Sweet son, of whom my sovereignty and power

“Alone are given! O son, whose smile may scorn

“The shafts of Jove whereby the Titans fell, ⁠935

“To thee I fly, and humbly here implore

“Thy help divine. Behold, from land to land

“Æneas, thine own brother, voyages on

“Storm-driven, by Juno’s causeless enmity.

“Thou knowest it well, and oft hast sighed to see ⁠940

“My sighs and tears. Dido the Tyrian now

“Detains him with soft speeches; and I fear

“Such courtesy from Juno means us ill;

“She is not one who, when the hour is ripe,

“Bids action pause. I therefore now intend ⁠945

“The Tyrian Queen to snare, and siege her breast

“With our invading fire, before some god

“Shall change her mood. But let her bosom burn

“With love of my Æneas not less than mine.

“This thou canst bring to pass. I pray thee hear ⁠950

“The plan I counsel. At his father’s call

“Ascanius, heir of kings, makes haste to climb

“To yon Sidonian citadel; my grace

“Protects him, and he bears gifts which were saved

“From hazard of the sea and burning Troy. ⁠955

“Him lapped in slumber on Cythera’s hill,

“Or in Idalia’s deep and hallowing shade,

“Myself will hide, lest haply he should learn

“Our stratagem, and burst in, foiling all.

“Wear thou his shape for one brief night thyself, ⁠960

“And let thy boyhood feign another boy’s

“Familiar countenance; when Dido there,

“Beside the royal feast and flowing wine,

“All smiles and joy, shall clasp thee to her breast,

“While she caresses thee, and her sweet lips ⁠965

“Touch close with thine, then let thy secret fire

“Breathe o’er her heart, to poison and betray.”



The love-god to his mother’s dear behest

Gave prompt assent. He put his pinions by

And tripped it like Iulus, light of heart. ⁠970

But Venus o’er Ascanius’ body poured

A perfect sleep, and, to her heavenly breast

Enfolding him, far, far away upbore

To fair Idalia’s grove, where fragrant buds

Of softly-petalled marjoram embower ⁠975

In pleasurable shade. Cupid straightway

Obeyed his mother’s word and bore the gifts,

Each worthy of a king, as offerings

To greet the Tyrian throne; and as he went

He clasped Achates’ friendly hand, and smiled. ⁠980



Father Æneas now, and all his band

Of Trojan chivalry, at social feast,

On lofty purple-pillowed couches lie;

Deft slaves fresh water on their fingers pour,

And from reed-woven basketry renew ⁠985

The plenteous bread, or bring smooth napery

Of softest weave; fifty handmaidens serve,

Whose task it is to range in order fair

The varied banquet, or at altars bright

Throw balm and incense on the sacred fires. ⁠990

A hundred more serve with an equal band

Of beauteous pages, whose obedient skill

Piles high the generous board and fills the bowl.

The Tyrians also to the festal hall

Come thronging, and receive their honor due, ⁠995

Each on his painted couch; with wondering eyes

Æneas’ gifts they view, and wondering more,

Mark young Iulus’ radiant brows divine,

His guileful words, the golden pall he bears,

And broidered veil with saffron lilies bound. ⁠1000

The Tyrian Queen ill-starred, already doomed

To her approaching woe, scanned ardently,

With kindling cheek and never-sated eyes,

The precious gifts and wonder-gifted boy.



He round Æneas’ neck his arms entwined, ⁠1005

Fed the deep yearning of his seeming sire,

Then sought the Queen’s embrace; her eyes, her soul

Clave to him as she strained him to her breast.

For Dido knew not in that fateful hour

How great a god betrayed her. He began, ⁠1010

Remembering his mother (she who bore

The lovely Acidalian Graces three),

To make the dear name of Sichæus fade,

And with new life, new love, to re-possess

Her long-since slumbering bosom’s lost desire. ⁠1015



When the main feast is over, they replace

The banquet with huge bowls, and crown the wine

With ivy-leaf and rose. Loud rings the roof

With echoing voices; from the gilded vault

Far-blazing cressets swing, or torches bright ⁠1020

Drive the dark night away. The Queen herself

Called for her golden chalice studded round

With jewels, and o’er-brimming it with wine

As Belus and his proud successors use,

Commanded silence, and this utterance made: ⁠1025

“Great Jove, of whom are hospitable laws

“For stranger-guest, may this auspicious day

“Bless both our Tyrians and the wanderers

“From Trojan shore. May our posterity

“Keep this remembrance! Let kind Juno smile, ⁠1030

“And Bacchus, lord of mirth, attend us here!

“And, O ye Tyrians, come one and all,

“And with well-omened words our welcome share!”

So saying, she outpoured the sacred drop

Due to the gods, and lightly from the rim ⁠1035

Sipped the first taste, then unto Bitias gave

With urgent cheer; he seized it, nothing loth,

Quaffed deep and long the foaming, golden bowl,

Then passed to others.

⁠On a gilded lyre

The flowing-haired Iopas woke a song ⁠1040

Taught him by famous Atlas: of the moon

He sang, the wanderer, and what the sun’s

Vast labors be; then would his music tell

Whence man and beast were born, and whence were bred

Clouds, lightnings, and Arcturus’ stormful sign, ⁠1045

The Hyades, rain-stars, and nigh the Pole

The greater and lesser Wain; for well he knew

Why colder suns make haste to quench their orb

In ocean-stream, and wintry nights be slow.

Loudly the Tyrians their minstrel praised, ⁠1050

And Troy gave prompt applause.

⁠Dido the while

With varying talk prolonged the fateful night,

And drank both long and deep of love and wine.

Now many a tale of Priam would she crave,

Of Hector many; or what radiant arms ⁠1055

Aurora’s son did wear; what were those steeds

Of Diomed, or what the stature seemed

Of great Achilles. “Come, illustrious guest,

“Begin the tale,” she said, “begin and tell

“The perfidy of Greece, thy people’s fall, ⁠1060

“And all thy wanderings. For now,—Ah, me!

“Seven times the summer’s burning stars have seen

“Thee wandering far o’er alien lands and seas.”





A general silence fell; and all gave ear,

While, from his lofty station at the feast,

Father Æneas with these words began:—



A grief unspeakable thy gracious word,

O sovereign lady, bids my heart live o’er: ⁠5

How Asia’s glory and afflicted throne

The Greek flung down; which woeful scene I saw,

And bore great part in each event I tell.

But O! in telling, what Dolopian churl,

Or Myrmidon, or gory follower ⁠10

Of grim Ulysses could the tears restrain?

’T is evening; lo! the dews of night begin

To fall from heaven, and yonder sinking stars

Invite to slumber. But if thy heart yearn

To hear in brief of all our evil days ⁠15

And Troy’s last throes, although the memory

Makes my soul shudder and recoil in pain,

I will essay it.

⁠Wearied of the war,

And by ill-fortune crushed, year after year,

The kings of Greece, by Pallas’ skill divine, ⁠20

Build a huge horse, a thing of mountain size,

With timbered ribs of fir. They falsely say

It has been vowed to Heaven for safe return,

And spread this lie abroad. Then they conceal

Choice bands of warriors in the deep, dark side, ⁠25

And fill the caverns of that monstrous womb

With arms and soldiery. In sight of Troy

Lies Tenedos, an island widely famed

And opulent, ere Priam’s kingdom fell,

But a poor haven now, with anchorage ⁠30

Not half secure; ’t was thitherward they sailed,

And lurked unseen by that abandoned shore.

We deemed them launched away and sailing far,

Bound homeward for Mycenæ. Teucria then

Threw off her grief inveterate; all her gates ⁠35

Swung wide; exultant went we forth, and saw

The Dorian camp untenanted, the siege

Abandoned, and the shore without a keel.

“Here!” cried we, “the Dolopian pitched; the host

“Of fierce Achilles here; here lay the fleet; ⁠40

“And here the battling lines to conflict ran.”

Others, all wonder, scan the gift of doom

By virgin Pallas given, and view with awe

That horse which loomed so large. Thymœtes then

Bade lead it through the gates, and set on high ⁠45

Within our citadel,—or traitor he,

Or tool of fate in Troy’s predestined fall.

But Capys, as did all of wiser heart,

Bade hurl into the sea the false Greek gift,

Or underneath it thrust a kindling flame, ⁠50

Or pierce the hollow ambush of its womb

With probing spear. Yet did the multitude

Veer round from vice to voice and doubt of all.

Then from the citadel, conspicuous,

Laocoön, with all his following choir, ⁠55

Hurried indignant down; and from afar

Thus hailed the people: “O unhappy men!

“What madness is this? Who deems our foemen fled?

“Think ye the gifts of Greece can lack for guile?

“Have ye not known Ulysses? The Achæan ⁠60

“Hides, caged in yonder beams; or this is reared

“For engin’ry on our proud battlements,

“To spy upon our roof-tops, or descend

“In ruin on the city. ’T is a snare.

“Trust not this horse, O Troy, whate’er it bode! ⁠65

“I fear the Greeks, though gift on gift they bear.”



So saying, he whirled with ponderous javelin

A sturdy stroke straight at the rounded side

Of the great, jointed beast. A tremor struck

Its towering form, and through the cavernous womb ⁠70

Rolled loud, reverberate rumbling, deep and long.

If heaven’s decree, if our own wills, that hour,

Had not been fixed on woe, his spear had brought

A bloody slaughter on our ambushed foe,

And Troy were standing on the earth this day! ⁠75

O Priam’s towers, ye were unfallen still!



But, lo! with hands fast bound behind, a youth

By clamorous Dardan shepherds haled along,

Was brought before our King,—to this sole end

A self-surrendered captive, that he might, ⁠80

Although a nameless stranger, cunningly

Deliver to the Greek the gates of Troy.

His firm-set mind flinched not from either goal,—

Success in crime, or on swift death to fall.

The thronging Trojan youth made haste his way ⁠85

From every side, all eager to see close

Their captive’s face, and flout with emulous scorn.

Hear now what Greek deception is, and learn

From one dark wickedness the whole. For he,

A mark for every eye, defenceless, dazed, ⁠90

Stood staring at our Phrygian hosts, and cried:

“Woe worth the day! What ocean or what shore

“Will have me now? What desperate path remains

“For miserable me? Now have I lost

“All foothold with the Greeks, and o’er my head ⁠95

“Troy’s furious sons call bloody vengeance down.”

Such groans and anguish turned all rage away

And stayed our lifted hands. We bade him tell

His birth, his errand, and from whence might be

Such hope of mercy for a foe in chains. ⁠100

Then fearing us no more, this speech he dared:

“O King! I will confess, whate’er befall,

“The whole unvarnished truth. I will not hide

“My Grecian birth. Yea, thus will I begin.

“For Fortune has brought wretched Sinon low; ⁠105

“But never shall her cruelty impair

“His honor and his truth. Perchance the name

“Of Palamedes, Belus’ glorious son,

“Has come by rumor to your listening ears;

“Whom by false witness and conspiracy, ⁠110

“Because his counsel was not for this war,

“The Greeks condemned, though guiltless, to his death,

“And now make much lament for him they slew.

“I, his companion, of his kith and kin,

“Sent hither by my humble sire’s command, ⁠115

“Followed his arms and fortunes from my youth.

“Long as his throne endured, and while he throve

“In conclave with his kingly peers, we twain

“Some name and lustre bore; but afterward,

“Because that cheat Ulysses envied him ⁠120

“(Ye know the deed), he from this world withdrew,

“And I in gloom and tribulation sore

“Lived miserably on, lamenting loud

“My lost friend’s blameless fall. A fool was I

“That kept not these lips closed; but I had vowed ⁠125

“That if a conqueror home to Greece I came,

“I would avenge. Such words moved wrath, and were

“The first shock of my ruin; from that hour,

“Ulysses whispered slander and alarm;

“Breathed doubt and malice into all men’s ears, ⁠130

“And darkly plotted how to strike his blow.

“Nor rest had he, till Calchas, as his tool—

“But why unfold this useless, cruel story?

“Why make delay? Ye count all sons of Greece

“Arrayed as one; and to have heard thus far ⁠135

“Suffices you. Take now your ripe revenge!

“Ulysses smiles and Atreus’ royal sons

“With liberal price your deed of blood repay.”



We ply him with passionate appeal

And question all his cause: of guilt so dire ⁠140

Or such Greek guile we harbored not the thought.

So on he prates, with well-feigned grief and fear,

And from his lying heart thus told his tale:

“Full oft the Greeks had fain achieved their flight,

“And raised the Trojan siege, and sailed away ⁠145

“War-wearied quite. O, would it had been so!

“Full oft the wintry tumult of the seas

“Did wall them round, and many a swollen storm

“Their embarcation stayed. But chiefly when,

“All fitly built of beams of maple fair, ⁠150

“This horse stood forth,—what thunders filled the skies!

“With anxious fears we sent Eurypylus

“To ask Apollo’s word; and from the shrine

“He brings the sorrowful commandment home:

“‘By flowing blood and by a virgin slain ⁠155

“‘The wild winds were appeased, when first ye came,

“‘Ye sons of Greece, to Ilium’s distant shore.

“‘Through blood ye must return. Let some Greek life

“‘Your expiration be.’

⁠The popular ear

“The saying caught, all spirits were dimmed o’er; ⁠160

“Cold doubt and horror through each bosom ran,

“Asking what fate would do, and on what wretch

“Apollo’s choice would all. Ulysses, then,

“Amid the people’s tumult and acclaim,

“Thrust Calchas forth, some prophecy to tell ⁠165

“To all the throng: he asked him o’er and o’er

“What Heaven desired. Already not a few

“Foretold the murderous plot, and silently

“Watched the dark doom upon my life impend.

“Twice five long days the seer his lips did seal, ⁠170

“And hid himself, refusing to bring forth

“His word of guile, and name what wretch should die.

“At last, reluctant, and all loudly urged

“By false Ulysses, he fulfils their plot,

“And, lifting up his voice oracular, ⁠175

“Points out myself the victim to be slain.

“Nor did one voice oppose. The mortal stroke

“Horribly hanging o’er each coward head

“Was changed to one man’s ruin, and their hearts

“Endured it well. Soon rose th’ accursed morn; ⁠180

“The bloody ritual was ready; salt

“Was sprinkled on the sacred loaf; my brows

“Were bound with fillets for the offering.

“But I escaped that death—yes! I deny not!

“I cast my fetters off, and darkling lay ⁠185

“Concealed all night in lake-side sedge and mire,

“Awaiting their departure, if perchance

“They should in truth set sail. But nevermore

“Shall my dear, native country greet these eyes.

“No more my father or my tender babes ⁠190

“Shall I behold. Nay, haply their own lives

“Are forfeit, when my foemen take revenge

“For my escape, and slay those helpless ones,

“In expiation of my guilty deed.

“O, by yon powers in heaven which witness truth, ⁠195

“By aught in this dark world remaining now

“Of spotless human faith and innocence,

“I do implore thee look with pitying eye

“On these long sufferings my heart hath borne.

“O, pity! I deserve not what I bear.” ⁠200



Pity and pardon to his tears we gave,

And spared his life. King Priam bade unbind

The fettered hands and loose those heavy chains

That pressed him sore; then with benignant mien

Addressed him thus: “Whate’er thy place or name, ⁠205

“Forget the people thou hast lost, and be

“Henceforth our countryman. But tell me true!

“What means the monstrous fabric of this horse?

“Who made it? Why? What offering to Heaven,

“On engin’ry of conquest may it be?” ⁠210

He spake; and in reply, with skilful guile,

Greek that he was! the other lifted up

His hands, now freed and chainless, to the skies:

“O ever-burning and inviolate fires,

“Witness my word! O altars and sharp steel, ⁠215

“Whose curse I fled, O fillets of the gods,

“Which bound a victim’s helpless forehead, hear!

“’T is lawful now to break the oath that gave

“My troth to Greece. To execrate her kings

“Is now my solemn duty. Their whole plot ⁠220

“I publish to the world. No fatherland

“And no allegiance binds me any more.

“O Troy, whom I have saved, I bid thee keep

“The pledge of safety by good Priam given,

“For my true tale shall my rich ransom be. ⁠225



“The Greeks’ one hope, since first they opened war,

“Was Pallas’ grace and power. But from the day

“When Diomed, bold scorner of the gods,

“And false Ulysses, author of all guile,

“Rose up and violently bore away ⁠230

“Palladium, her holy shrine, hewed down

“The sentinels of her acropolis,

“And with polluted, gory hands dared touch

“The goddess’ virgin fillets, white and pure,—

“Thenceforth, I say, the courage of the Greeks ⁠235

“Ebbed utterly away; their strength was lost,

“And favoring Pallas all her grace withdrew.

“No dubious sign she gave. Scarce had they set

“Her statue in our own camp, when glittering flame

“Flashed from the staring eyes; from all its limbs ⁠240

“Salt sweat ran forth; three times (O wondrous tale!)

“It gave a sudden skyward leap, and made

“Prodigious trembling of her lance and shield.

“The prophet Calchas bade us straightway take

“Swift flight across the sea; for fate had willed ⁠245

“The Trojan citadel should never fall

“By Grecian arm, till once more they obtain

“New oracles at Argos, and restore

“That god the round ships hurried o’er the sea.

“Now in Mycenæ, whither they are fled, ⁠250

“New help of heaven they find, and forge anew

“The means of war. Back hither o’er the waves

“They suddenly will come. So Calchas gave

“The meaning of the god. Warned thus, they reared

“In place of Pallas’ desecrated shrine ⁠255

“Yon image of the horse, to expiate

“The woeful sacrilege. Calchas ordained

“That they should build a thing of monstrous size

“Of jointed beams, and rear it heavenward,

“So might it never pass your gates, nor come ⁠260

“Inside your walls, nor anywise restore

“Unto the Trojans their lost help divine.

“For had your hands Minerva’s gift profaned,

“A ruin horrible—O, may the gods

“Bring it on Calchas rather!—would have come ⁠265

“On Priam’s throne and all the Phrygian power.

“But if your hands should lift the holy thing

“To your own citadel, then Asia’s host

“Would hurl aggression upon Pelops’ land,

“And all that curse on our own nation fall.” ⁠270



Thus Sinon’s guile and practised perjury

Our doubt dispelled. His stratagems and tears

Wrought victory where neither Tydeus’ son,

Nor mountain-bred Achilles could prevail,

Nor ten years’ war, nor fleets a thousand strong. ⁠275

But now a vaster spectacle of fear

Burst over us, to vex our startled souls.

Laocoön, that day by cast of lot

Priest unto Neptune, was in act to slay

A huge bull at the god’s appointed fane. ⁠280

Lo! o’er the tranquil deep from Tenedos

Appeared a pair (I shudder as I tell)

Of vastly coiling serpents, side by side,

Stretching along the waves, and to the shore

Taking swift course; their necks were lifted high, ⁠285

Their gory dragon-crests o’ertopped the waves;

All else, half seen, trailed low along the sea;

While with loud cleavage of the foaming brine

Their monstrous backs wound forward fold on fold.

Soon they made land; the furious bright eyes ⁠290

Glowed with ensanguined fire; their quivering tongues

Lapped hungrily the hissing, gruesome jaws.

All terror-pale we fled. Unswerving then

The monsters to Laocoön made way.

First round the tender limbs of his two sons ⁠295

Each dragon coiled, and on the shrinking flesh

Fixed fast and fled. Then seized they on the sire,

Who flew to aid, a javelin in his hand,

Embracing close in bondage serpentine

Twice round the waist; and twice in scaly grasp ⁠300

Around his neck, and o’er him grimly peered

With lifted head and crest; he, all the while,

His holy fillet fouled with venomous blood,

Tore at his fetters with a desperate hand,

And lifted up such agonizing voice, ⁠305

As when a bull, death-wounded, seeks to flee

The sacrificial altar, and thrusts back

From his doomed head the ill-aimed, glancing blade.

Then swiftly writhed the dragon-pair away

Unto the templed height, and in the shrine ⁠310

Of cruel Pallas sure asylum found

Beneath the goddess’ feet and orbèd shield.



Such trembling horror as we ne’er had known

Seized now on every heart. “Of his vast guilt

“Laocoön,” they say, “receives reward; ⁠315

“For he with most abominable spear

“Did strike and violate that blessèd wood.

“Yon statue to the temple! Ask the grace

“Of glorious Pallas!” So the people cried

In general acclaim. Ourselves did make ⁠320

A breach within our walls and opened wide

The ramparts of our city. One and all

Were girded for the task. Smooth-gliding wheels

Were ’neath its feet; great ropes stretched round its neck,

Till o’er our walls the fatal engine climbed, ⁠325

Pregnant with men-at-arms. On every side

Fair youths and maidens made a festal song.

And hauled the ropes with merry heart and gay.

So on and up it rolled, a tower of doom,

And in proud menace through our Forum moved. ⁠330

O Ilium, my country, where abode

The gods of all my sires! O glorious walls

Of Dardan’s sons! before your gates it passed,

Four times it stopped and dreadful clash of arms

Four times from its vast concave loudly rang. ⁠335

Yet frantic we pressed on, our hearts all blind,

And in the consecrated citadel

Set up the hateful thing. Cassandra then

From heaven-instructed heart our doom foretold;

But doomed to unbelief were Ilium’s sons. ⁠340

Our hapless nation on its dying day

Flung free o’er streets and shrines the votive flowers.



The skies rolled on; and o’er the ocean fell

The veil of night, till utmost earth and heaven

And all their Myrmidonian stratagems ⁠345

Were mantled darkly o’er. In silent sleep

The Trojan city lay; dull slumber chained

Its weary life. But now the Greek array

Of ordered ships moved on from Tenedos,

Their only light the silent, favoring moon, ⁠350

On to the well-known strand. The King displayed

A torch from his own ship, and Sinon then,

Whom wrathful Heaven defended in that hour,

Let the imprisoned band of Greeks go free

From that huge womb of wood; the open horse ⁠355

Restored them to the light; and joyfully

Emerging from the darkness, one by one,

Princely Thessander, Sthenelus, and dire

Ulysses glided down the swinging cord.

Closely upon them Neoptolemus, ⁠360

The son of Peleus, came, and Acamas,

King Menelaus, Thoas and Machaon,

And last, Epeüs, who the fabric wrought.

Upon the town they fell, for deep in sleep

And drowsed with wine it lay; the sentinels ⁠365

They slaughtered, and through gates now opened wide

Let in their fellows, and arrayed for war

Th’ auxiliar legions of the dark design.



That hour it was when heaven’s first gift of sleep

On weary hearts of men most sweetly steals. ⁠370

O, then my slumbering senses seemed to see

Hector, with woeful face and streaming eyes;

I seemed to see him from the chariot trailing.

Foul with dark dust and gore, his swollen feet

Pierced with a cruel thong. Ah me! what change ⁠375

From glorious Hector when he homeward bore

The spoils of fierce Achilles; or hurled far

That shower of torches on the ships of Greece!

Unkempt his beard, his tresses thick with blood,

And all those wounds in sight which he did take ⁠380

Defending Troy. Then, weeping as I spoke,

I seemed on that heroic shape to call

With mournful utterance: “O star of Troy!

“O surest hope and stay of all her sons!

“Why tarriest thou so long? What region sends ⁠385

“The long-expected Hector home once more?

“These weary eyes that look on thee have seen

“Hosts of thy kindred die, and fateful change

“Upon thy people and thy city fall.

“O, say what dire occasion has defiled ⁠390

“Thy tranquil brows? What mean those bleeding wounds?”



Silent he stood, nor anywise would stay

My vain lament; but groaned, and answered thus:

“Haste, goddess-born, and out of yonder flames

“Achieve thy flight. Our foes have scaled the wall; ⁠395

“Exalted Troy is falling. Fatherland

“And Priam ask no more. If human arm

“Could profit Troy, my own had kept her free.

“Her Lares and her people to thy hands

“Troy here commends. Companions let them be ⁠400

“Of all thy fortunes. Let them share thy quest

“Of that wide realm, which, after wandering far,

“Thou shalt achieve, at last, beyond the sea.”

He spoke: and from our holy hearth brought forth

The solemn fillet, the ancestral shrines, ⁠405

And Vesta’s ever-bright, inviolate fire.



Now shrieks and loud confusion swept the town;

And though my father’s dwelling stood apart

Embowered deep in trees, th’ increasing din

Drew nearer, and the battle-thunder swelled. ⁠410

I woke on sudden, and up-starting scaled

The roof, the tower, then stood with listening ear:

’T was like an harvest burning, when wild winds

Uprouse the flames; ’t was like a mountain stream

That bursts in flood and ruinously whelms ⁠415

Sweet fields and farms and all the ploughman’s toil

Whirling whole groves along; while dumb with fear,

From some far cliff the shepherd hears the sound.

Now their Greek plot was plain, the stratagem

At last laid bare. Deiphobus’ great house ⁠420

Sank vanquished in the fire. Ucalegon’s

Hard by was blazing, while the waters wide

Around Sigeum gave an answering glow.

Shrill trumpets rang; loud shouting voices roared;

Wildly I armed me (when the battle calls, ⁠425

How dimly reason shines!); I burned to join

The rally of my peers, and to the heights

Defensive gather. Frenzy and vast rage

Seized on my soul. I only sought what way

With sword in hand some noble death to die. ⁠430



When Panthus met me, who had scarce escaped

The Grecian spears,—Panthus of Othrys’ line,

Apollo’s priest within our citadel;

His holy emblems, his defeated gods,

And his small grandson in his arms he bore, ⁠435

While toward the gates with wild, swift steps he flew.

“How fares the kingdom, Panthus? What strong place

“Is still our own?” But scarcely could I ask

When thus, with many a groan, he made reply:—

“Dardania’s death and doom are come to-day, ⁠440

“Implacable. There is no Ilium now;

“Our Trojan name is gone, the Teucrian throne

“Quite fallen. For the wrathful power of Jove

“Has given to Argos all our boast and pride.

“The Greek is lord of all yon blazing towers. ⁠445

“Yon horse uplifted on our city’s heart

“Disgorges men-at-arms. False Sinon now,

“With scorn exultant, heaps up flame on flame.

“Others throw wide the gates. The whole vast horde

“That out of proud Mycenæ hither sailed ⁠450

“Is at us. With confronting spears they throng

“Each narrow passage. Every steel-bright blade

“Is flashing naked, making haste for blood.

“Our sentries helpless meet the invading shock

“And give back blind and unavailing war.” ⁠455



By Panthus’ word and by some god impelled,

I flew to battle, where the flames leaped high,

Where grim Bellona called, and all the air

Resounded high as heaven with shouts of war.

Rhipeus and Epytus of doughty arm ⁠460

Were at my side, Dymas and Hypanis,

Seen by a pale moon, join our little band;

And young Corœbus, Mygdon’s princely son,

Who was in Troy that hour because he loved

Cassandra madly, and had made a league ⁠465

As Priam’s kinsman with our Phrygian arms:

Ill-starred, to heed not what the virgin raved!

When these I saw close-gathered for the fight,

I thus addressed them: “Warriors, vainly brave,

“If ye indeed desire to follow one ⁠470

“Who dares the uttermost brave men may do,

“Our evil plight ye see: the gods are fled

“From every altar and protecting fire,

“Which were the kingdom’s stay. Ye offer aid

“Unto your country’s ashes. Let us fight ⁠475

“Unto the death! To arms, my men, to arms!

“The single hope and stay of desperate men

“Is their despair.” Thus did I rouse their souls.

Then like the ravening wolves, some night of cloud,

When cruel hunger in an empty maw ⁠480

Drives them forth furious, and their whelps behind

Wait famine-throated; so through foemen’s steel

We flew to surest death, and kept our way

Straight through the midmost town. The wings of night

Brooded above us in vast vault of shade. ⁠485

But who the bloodshed of that night can tell?

What tongue its deaths shall number, or what eyes

Find meed of tears to equal all its woe?

The ancient City fell, whose throne had stood

Age after age. Along her streets were strewn ⁠490

The unresisting dead; at household shrines

And by the temples of the gods they lay.

Yet not alone was Teucrian blood required:

Oft out of vanquished hearts fresh valor flamed,

And the Greek victor fell. Anguish and woe ⁠495

Were everywhere; pale terrors ranged abroad,

And multitudinous death met every eye.



Androgeos, followed by a thronging band

Of Greeks, first met us on our desperate way;

But heedless, and confounding friend with foe, ⁠500

Thus, all unchallenged, hailed us as his own:

“Haste, heroes! Are ye laggards at this hour?

“Others bear off captives and the spoil

“Of burning Troy. Just from the galleys ye?”

He spoke; but straightway, when no safe reply ⁠505

Returned, he knew himself entrapped, and fallen

Into a foeman’s snare; struck dumb was he

And stopped both word and motion; as one steps,

When blindly treading a thick path of thorns,

Upon a snake, and sick with fear would flee ⁠510

That lifted wrath and swollen gorge of green:

So trembling did Androgeos backward fall.

At them we flew and closed them round with war;

And since they could not know the ground, and fear

Had whelmed them quite, we swiftly laid them low. ⁠515

Thus Fortune on our first achievement smiled;

And, flushed with victory, Corœbus cried:

“Come, friends, and follow Fortune’s finger, where

“She beckons us what path deliverance lies.

“Change we our shields, and these Greek emblems wear. ⁠520

“’Twixt guile and valor who will nicely weigh

“When foes are met? These dead shall find us arms.”

With this, he dons Androgeos’ crested helm

And beauteous, blazoned shield; and to his side

Girds on a Grecian blade. Young Rhipeus next, ⁠525

With Dymas and the other soldiery,

Repeat the deed, exulting, and array

Their valor in fresh trophies from the slain.

Now intermingled with our foes we moved,

And alien emblems wore; the long, black night ⁠530

Brought many a grapple, and a host of Greeks

Down to the dark we hurled. Some fled away,

Seeking their safe ships and the friendly shore.

Some cowards foul went clambering back again

To that vast horse and hid them in its maw. ⁠535

But woe is me! If gods their help withhold,

’T is impious to be brave. That very hour

The fair Cassandra passed us, bound in chains,

King Priam’s virgin daughter, from the shrine

And altars of Minerva; her loose hair ⁠540

Had lost its fillet; her impassioned eyes

Were lifted in vain prayer,—her eyes alone!

For chains of steel her frail, soft hands confined.

Corœbus’ eyes this horror not endured,

And, sorrow-crazed, he plunged him headlong in ⁠545

The midmost fray, self-offered to be slain,

While in close mass our troop behind him poured.

But, at this point, the overwhelming spears

Of our own kinsmen rained resistless down

From a high temple-tower; and carnage wild ⁠550

Ensued, because of the Greek arms we bore

And our false crests. The howling Grecian band,

Crazed by Cassandra’s rescue, charged at us

From every side; Ajax of savage soul,

The sons of Atreus, and that whole wild horde ⁠555

Achilles from Dolopian deserts drew.

’T was like the bursting storm, when gales contend,

West wind and South, and jocund wind of morn

Upon his orient steeds—while forests roar,

And foam-flecked Nereus with fierce trident stirs ⁠560

The dark deep of the sea.

⁠All who did hide

In shadows of the night, by our assault

Surprised, and driven in tumultuous flight,

Now start to view. Full well they now can see

Our shields and borrowed arms, and clearly note ⁠565

Our speech of alien sound; their multitude

O’erwhelms us utterly. Corœbus first

At mailed Minerva’s altar prostrate lay,

Pierced by Peneleus’ blade; then Rhipeus fell;

We deemed him of all Trojans the most just, ⁠570

Most scrupulously righteous; but the gods

Gave judgment otherwise. There Dymas died,

And Hypanis, by their compatriots slain;

Nor thee, O Panthus, in that mortal hour,

Could thy clean hands or Phœbus’ priesthood save. ⁠575

O ashes of my country! funeral pyre

Of all my kin! bear witness that my breast

Shrank not from any sword the Grecian drew,

And that my deeds the night my country died

Deserved a warrior’s death, had Fate ordained. ⁠580



But soon our ranks were broken; at my side

Stayed Iphitus and Pelias; one with age

Was long since wearied, and the other bore

The burden of Ulysses’ crippling wound.

Straightway the roar and tumult summoned us ⁠585

To Priam’s palace, where a battle raged

As if to save this no conflict else were known,

And all Troy’s dying brave were mustered there.

There we beheld the war-god unconfined;

The Greek besiegers to the roof-tops fled; ⁠590

Or, with shields tortoise-back, the gates assailed.

Ladders were on the walls; and round by round,

Up the huge bulwark as they fight their way,

The shielded left-hand thwarts the falling spears,

The right to every vantage closely clings. ⁠595

The Trojans hurl whole towers and roof-tops down

Upon the mounting foe; for well they see

That the last hour is come, and with what arms

The dying must resist. Rich gilded beams,

With many a beauteous blazon of old time, ⁠600

Go crashing down. Men armed with naked swords

Defend the inner doors in close array.

Thus were our hearts inflamed to stand and strike

For the king’s house, and to his body-guard

Bring succor, and renew their vanquished powers. ⁠605

A certain gate I knew, a secret way,

Which gave free passage between Priam’s halls,

And exit rearward; hither, in the days

Before our fall, the lone Andromache

Was wont with young Astyanax to pass ⁠610

In quest of Priam and her husband’s kin.

This way to climb the palace roof I flew,

Where, desperate, the Trojans with vain skill

Hurled forth repellent arms. A tower was there,

Reared skyward from the roof-top, giving view ⁠615

Of Troy’s wide walls and full reconnaissance

Of all Achæa’s fleets and tented field;

This, with strong steel, our gathered strength assailed,

And as the loosened courses offered us

Great threatening fissures, we uprooted it ⁠620

From its aerial throne and thrust it down:

It fell with instantaneous crash of thunder

Along the Danaan host in ruin wide.

But fresh ranks soon arrive; thick showers of stone

Rain down, with every missile rage can find. ⁠625



Now at the threshold of the outer court

Pyrrhus triumphant stood, with glittering arms

And helm of burnished brass. He glittered like

Some swollen viper, fed on poison-leaves,

Whom chilling winter shelters underground, ⁠630

Till, fresh and strong, he sheds his annual scales

And, crawling forth rejuvenate, uncoils

His slimy length; his lifted gorge insults

The sunbeam with three-forked and quivering tongue.

Huge Periphas was there; Automedon, ⁠635

Who drove Achilles’ steeds, and bore his arms.

Then Scyros’ island-warriors assault

The palaces, and hurl reiterate fire

At wall and tower. Pyrrhus led the van;

Seizing an axe he clove the ponderous doors ⁠640

And rent the hinges from their posts of bronze;

He cut the beams, and through the solid mass

Burrowed his way, till like a window huge

The breach yawned wide, and opened to his gaze

A vista of long courts and corridors, ⁠645

The hearth and home of many an ancient king,

And Priam’s own; upon its sacred bourne

The sentry, all in arms, kept watch and ward.

Confusion, groans, and piteous turmoil

Were in that dwelling; women shrieked and wailed ⁠650

From many a dark retreat, and their loud cry

Rang to the golden stars. Through those vast halls

The panic-stricken mothers wildly roved,

And clung with frantic kisses and embrace

Unto the columns cold. Fierce as his sire, ⁠655

Pyrrhus moves on; nor bar nor sentinel

May stop his way; down tumbles the great door

Beneath the battering beam, and with it fall

Hinges and framework violently torn.

Force bursts all bars; th’ assailing Greeks break in, ⁠660

Do butchery, and with men-at-arms possess

What place they will. Scarce with an equal rage

A foaming river, when its dykes are down,

O’erwhelms its mounded shores, and through the plain

Rolls mountain-high, while from the ravaged farms ⁠665

Its fierce flood sweeps along both flock and fold.



My own eyes looked on Neoptolemus

Frenzied with slaughter, and both Atreus’ sons

Upon the threshold frowning; I beheld

Her hundred daughters with old Hecuba; ⁠670

And Priam, whose own bleeding wounds defiled

The altars where himself had blessed the fires;

There fifty nuptial beds gave promise proud

Of princely heirs; but all their brightness now,

Of broidered cunning and barbaric gold, ⁠675

Lay strewn and trampled on. The Danaan foe

Stood victor, where the raging flame had failed.

But would ye haply know what stroke of doom

On Priam fell? Now when his anguish saw

His kingdom lost and fallen, his abode ⁠680

Shattered, and in his very hearth and home

Th’ exulting foe, the aged King did bind

His rusted armor to his trembling thews,—

All vainly,—and a useless blade of steel

He girded on; then charged, resolved to die ⁠685

Encircled by the foe. Within his walls

There stood, beneath the wide and open sky,

A lofty altar; an old laurel-tree

Leaned o’er it, and enclasped in holy shade

The statues of the tutelary powers. ⁠690

Here Hecuba and all the princesses

Took refuge vain within the place of prayer.

Like panic-stricken doves in some dark storm,

Close-gathering they sate, and in despair

Embraced their graven gods. But when the Queen ⁠695

Saw Priam with his youthful harness on,

“What frenzy, O my wretched lord,” she cried,

“Arrayed thee in such arms? O, whither now?

“Not such defences, nor such arm as thine,

“The time requires, though thy companion were ⁠700

“Our Hector’s self. O, yield thee, I implore!

“This altar now shall save us one and all,

“Or we must die together.” With these words

She drew him to her side, and near the shrine

Made for her aged spouse a place to cling. ⁠705



But, lo! just ’scaped of Pyrrhus’ murderous hand,

Polites, one of Priam’s sons, fled fast

Along the corridors, through thronging foes

And a thick rain of spears. Wildly he gazed

Across the desolate halls, wounded to death. ⁠710

Fierce Pyrrhus followed after, pressing hard

With mortal stroke, and now his hand and spear

Were close upon:—when the lost youth leaped forth

Into his father’s sight, and prostrate there

Lay dying, while his life-blood ebbed away. ⁠715

Then Priam, though on all sides death was nigh,

Quit not the strife, nor from loud wrath refrained:

“Thy crime and impious outrage, may the gods

“(If Heaven to mortals render debt and due)

“Justly reward and worthy honors pay! ⁠720

“My own son’s murder thou hast made me see,

“Blood and pollution impiously throwing

“Upon a father’s head. Not such was he,

“Not such, Achilles, thy pretended sire,

“When Priam was his foe. With flush of shame ⁠725

“He nobly listened to a suppliant’s plea

“In honor made. He rendered to the tomb

“My Hector’s body pale, and me did send

“Back to my throne a king.”

⁠With this proud word

The aged warrior hurled with nerveless arm ⁠730

His ineffectual spear, which hoarsely rang

Rebounding on the brazen shield, and hung

Piercing the midmost boss,—but all in vain.

Then Pyrrhus: “Take these tidings, and convey

“A message to my father, Peleus’ son! ⁠735

“Tell him my naughty deeds! Be sure and say

“How Neoptolemus hath shamed his sires.

“Now die!”

⁠With this, he trailed before the shrines

The trembling King, whose feet slipped in the stream

Of his son’s blood. Then Pyrrhus’ left hand clutched ⁠740

The tresses old and gray; a glittering sword

His right hand lifted high, and buried it

Far as the hilt in that defenceless heart.

So Priam’s story ceased. Such final doom

Fell on him, while his dying eyes surveyed ⁠745

Troy burning, and her altars overthrown,

Though once of many an orient land and tribe

The boasted lord. In huge dismemberment

His severed trunk lies tombless on the shore,

The head from shoulder torn, the corpse unknown. ⁠750



Then first wild horror on my spirit fell

And dazed me utterly. A vision rose

Of my own cherished father, as I saw

The King, his aged peer, sore wounded lying

In mortal agony; a vision too ⁠755

Of lost Creüsa at my ravaged hearth,

And young Iulus’ peril. Then my eyes

Looked round me seeking aid. But all were fled,

War-wearied and undone; some earthward leaped

From battlement or tower; some in despair ⁠760

Yielded their suffering bodies to the flame.

I stood there sole surviving; when, behold,

To Vesta’s altar clinging in dumb fear,

Hiding and crouching in the hallowed shade,

Tyndarus’ daughter!—’t was the burning town ⁠765

Lighted full well my roving steps and eyes.

In fear was she both of some Trojan’s rage

For Troy o’erthrown, and of some Greek revenge,

Or her wronged husband’s long indignant ire.

So hid she at that shrine her hateful brow, ⁠770

Being of Greece and Troy, full well she knew,

The common curse. Then in my bosom rose

A blaze of wrath; methought I should avenge

My dying country, and with horrid deed

Pay crime for crime. “Shall she return unscathed ⁠775

“To Sparta, to Mycenæ’s golden pride,

“And have a royal triumph? Shall her eyes

“Her sire and sons, her hearth and husband see,

“While Phrygian captives follow in her train?

“Is Priam murdered? Have the flames swept o’er ⁠780

“My native Troy? and doth our Dardan strand

“Sweat o’er and o’er with sanguinary dew?

“O, not thus unavenged! For though there be

“No glory if I smite a woman’s crime,

“Nor conqueror’s fame for such a victory won, ⁠785

“Yet if I blot this monster out, and wring

“Full punishment from guilt, the time to come

“Will praise me, and sweet pleasure it will be

“To glut my soul with vengeance and appease

“The ashes of my kindred.”

⁠So I raved, ⁠790

And to such frenzied purpose gave my soul.

Then with clear vision (never had I seen

Her presence so unclouded) I beheld,

In golden beams that pierced the midnight gloom,

My gracious mother, visibly divine, ⁠795

And with that mien of majesty she wears

When seen in heaven; she stayed me with her hand,

And from her lips of rose this counsel gave:

“O son, what sorrow stirs thy boundless rage?

“What madness this? Or whither vanisheth ⁠800

“Thy love of me? Wilt thou not seek to know

“Where bides Anchises, thy abandoned sire,

“Now weak with age? or if Creüsa lives

“And young Ascanius, who are ringed about

“With ranks of Grecian foes, and long ere this— ⁠805

“Save that my love can shield them and defend—

“Had fallen on flame or fed some hungry sword?

“Not Helen’s hated beauty works thee woe;

“Nor Paris, oft-accused. The cruelty

“Of gods, of gods unaided, overwhelms ⁠810

“Thy country’s power, and from its lofty height

“Casts Ilium down. Behold, I take away

“The barrier-cloud that dims thy mortal eye,

“With murk and mist o’er-veiling. Fear not thou

“To heed thy mother’s word, nor let thy heart ⁠815

“Refuse obedience to her counsel given.

“’Mid yonder trembling ruins, where thou see’st

“Stone torn from stone, with dust and smoke uprolling,

“’T is Neptune strikes the wall; his trident vast

“Makes her foundation tremble, and unseats ⁠820

“The city from her throne. Fierce Juno leads

“Resistless onset at the Scæan gate,

“And summons from the ships the league of powers,

“Wearing her wrathful sword. On yonder height

“Behold Tritonia in the citadel ⁠825

“Clothed with the lightning and her Gorgon-shield!

“Unto the Greeks great Jove himself renews

“Their courage and their power; ’t is he thrusts on

“The gods themselves against the Trojan arms.

“Fly, O my son! The war’s wild work give o’er! ⁠830

“I will be always nigh and set thee safe

“Upon thy father’s threshold.” Having said,

She fled upon the viewless night away.



Then loomed o’er Troy the apparition vast

Of her dread foes divine; I seemed to see ⁠835

All Ilium sink in fire, and sacred Troy,

Of Neptune’s building, utterly o’erthrown.

So some huge ash-tree on the mountain’s brow

(When rival woodmen, heaving stroke on stroke

Of two-edged axes, haste to cast her down) ⁠840

Sways ominously her trembling, leafy top,

And drops her smitten head; till by her wounds

Vanquished at last, she makes her dying groan,

And falls in loud wreck from the cliffs uptorn.



I left the citadel; and, led by Heaven, ⁠845

Threaded the maze of deadly foes and fires,

Through spears that glanced aside and flames that fell.

Soon came I to my father’s ancient seat,

Our home and heritage. But lo! my sire

(Whom first of all I sought, and first would bear ⁠850

To safe asylum in the distant hills)

Vowed he could never, after fallen Troy,

Live longer on, or bear an exile’s woe.

“O you,” he cried, “whose blood not yet betrays

“The cruel taint of time, whose powers be still ⁠855

“Unpropped and undecayed, go, take your flight.

“If heavenly wrath had willed my life to spare,

“This dwelling had been safe. It is too much

“That I have watched one wreck, and for too long

“Outlived my vanquished country. Thus, O, thus! ⁠860

“Compose these limbs for death, and say farewell.

“My own hand will procure it; or my foe

“Will strip me bare. It is an easy loss

“To have no grave. For many a year gone by,

“Accursed of Heaven, I tarry in this world ⁠865

“A useless burden, since that fatal hour

“When Jove, of gods the Sire and men the King,

“His lightnings o’er me breathed and blasting fire.”



Such fixed resolve he uttered o’er and o’er

And would not yield, though with my tears did join ⁠870

My spouse Creüsa, fair Ascanius,

And our whole house, imploring the gray sire

Not with himself to ruin all, nor add

Yet heavier burdens to our crushing doom.

He still cried, “No!” and clung to where he sate ⁠875

And to the same dread purpose. I once more

Back to the fight would speed. For death alone

I made my wretched prayer. What space was left

For wisdom now? What chance or hope was given?

“Didst thou, dear father, dream that I could fly ⁠880

“Sundered from thee? Did such an infamy

“Fall from a father’s lips? If Heaven’s decree

“Will of this mighty nation not let live

“A single soul, if thine own purpose be

“To cast thyself and thy posterity ⁠885

“Into thy country’s grave, behold, the door

“Is open to thy death! Lo, Pyrrhus comes

“Red-handed from King Priam! He has slain

“A son before his father’s eyes, and spilt

“A father’s blood upon his own hearthstone. ⁠890

“Was it for this, O heavenly mother mine,

“That thou hast brought me safe through sword and fire?

“That I might see these altars desecrate

“By their worst foes? that I might look upon

“My sire, my wife, and sweet Ascanius ⁠895

“Dead at my feet in one another’s blood?

“To arms, my men, to arms! The hour of death

“Now beckons to the vanquished. Let me go

“Whither the Greeks are gathered; let me stand

“Where oft revives the flagging stroke of war: ⁠900

“Not all of us unavenged this day!”



I clasped my sword-belt round me once again,

Fitted my left arm to my shield, and turned

To fly the house; but at the threshold clung

Creüsa to my knees, and lifted up ⁠905

Iulus to his father’s arms. “If thou

“Wouldst rush on death,” she cried, “O, suffer us

“To share thy perils with thee to the end.

“But if this day’s work bid thee trust a sword,

“Defend thy hearthstone first. Who else shall guard ⁠910

“Thy babe Iulus, or thy reverend sire?

“Or me, thy wife that was—what help have I?”



So rang the roof-top with her piteous cries:

But lo! a portent wonderful to see

On sudden rose; for while his parents’ grief ⁠915

Held the boy close in arm and full in view,

There seemed upon Iulus’ head to glow

A flickering peak of fire; the tongue of flame

Innocuous o’er his clustering tresses played,

And hovered round his brows.

⁠We, horror-struck, ⁠920

Grasped at his burning hair, and sprinkled him,

To quench that holy and auspicious fire.

Then sire Anchises with exultant eyes

Looked heavenward, and lifted to the stars

His voice and outstretched hands. “Almighty Jove, ⁠925

“If aught of prayer may move thee, let thy grace

“Now visit us! O, hear this holy vow!

“And if for service at thine altars done,

“We aught can claim, O Father, lend us aid,

“And ratify the omen thou hast given!” ⁠930



Scarce ceased his aged voice, when suddenly

From leftward, with a deafening thunder-peal,

Cleaving the blackness of the vaulted sky,

A meteor-star in trailing splendor ran,

Exceeding bright. We watched it glide sublime ⁠935

O’er tower and town, until its radiant beam

In forest-mantled Ida died away;

But left a furrow on its track in air,

A glittering, long line, while far and wide

The sulphurous fume and exhalation flowed. ⁠940



My father strove not now; but lifted him

In prayer to all the gods, in holy awe

Of that auspicious star, and thus exclaimed:

“Tarry no moment more! Behold, I come!

“Whithersoe’er ye lead, my steps obey. ⁠945

“Gods of my fathers, O, preserve our name!

“Preserve my son, and his! This augury

“Is yours; and Troy on your sole strength relies.

“I yield, dear son; I journey at thy side.”



He spoke; and higher o’er the blazing walls ⁠950

Leaped the loud fire, while ever nearer drew

The rolling surges of tumultuous flame.

“Haste, father, on these bending shoulders climb!

“This back is ready, and the burden light;

“One peril smites us both, whate’er befall; ⁠955

“One rescue both shall find. Close at my side

“Let young Iulus run, while, not too nigh,

“My wife Creüsa heeds what way we go.

“Ye servants of our house, give ear, I pray,

“To my command. Outside the city’s gates ⁠960

“Lies a low mound and long since ruined fane

“To Ceres vowed; a cypress’ ancient shade

“O’erhangs it, which our fathers’ pious care

“Protected year by year; by various paths

“Be that our meeting-place.

⁠“But in thy hands ⁠965

“Bring, sire, our household gods, and sanctities:

“For me to touch, who come this very hour

“From battle and the fresh blood of the slain,

“Were but abomination, till what time

“In living waters I shall make me clean.” ⁠970



So saying, I bowed my neck and shoulders broad,

O’erspread me with a lion’s tawny skin,

And lifted up my load. Close at my side

Little Iulus twined his hand in mine

And followed, with unequal step, his sire. ⁠975

My wife at distance came. We hastened on,

Creeping through shadows; I, who once had viewed

Undaunted every instrument of war

And all the gathered Greeks in grim array,

Now shook at every gust, and heard all sounds ⁠980

With fevered trepidation, fearing both

For him I bore and him who clasped my hand.



Now near the gates I drew, and deemed our flight

Safely at end, when suddenly I heard

The sounding tread of many warriors ⁠985

That seemed hard-by, while through the murky night

My father peered, and shouted, “O my son,

“Away, away! for surely all our foes

“Are here upon us, and my eyes behold

“The glance of glittering shields and flash of arms.” ⁠990



O, then some evil-working, nameless god

Clouded my senses quite: for while I sped

Along our pathless way, and left behind

All paths and regions known—O wretched me!—

Creüsa on some dark disaster fell; ⁠995

She stopped, or wandered, or sank down undone,—

I never knew what way,—and nevermore

I looked on her alive. Yet knew I not

My loss, nor backward turned a look or thought,

Till by that hallowed hill to Ceres vowed ⁠1000

We gathered all,—and she alone came not,

While husband, friends, and son made search in vain.

What god, what man, did not my grief accuse

In frenzied word? In all the ruined land

What worse woe had I seen? Entrusting then ⁠1005

My sire, my son, and all the Teucrian gods

To the deep shadows of a slanting vale

Where my allies kept guard, I hied me back

To that doomed town, re-girt in glittering arms.

Resolved was I all hazards to renew, ⁠1010

All Troy to re-explore, and once again

Offer my life to perils without end.

The walls and gloomy gates whence forth I came

I first revisit, and retrace my way,

Searching the night once more. On all sides round ⁠1015

Horror spread wide; the very silence breathed

A terror on my soul. I hastened then

Back to my fallen home, if haply there

Her feet had strayed; but the invading Greeks

Were its possessors, though the hungry fire ⁠1020

Was blown along the roof-tree, and the flames

Rolled raging upward on the fitful gale.

To Priam’s house I haste, and climb once more

The citadel; in Juno’s temple there,

The chosen guardians of her wasted halls, ⁠1025

Phœnix and dread Ulysses watched the spoil.

Here, snatched away from many a burning fane,

Troy’s treasures lay,—rich tables for the gods,

Thick bowls of massy gold, and vestures rare,

Confusedly heaped up, while round the pile ⁠1030

Fair youths and trembling virgins stood forlorn.



Yet oft my voice rang dauntless through the gloom,

From street to street I cried with anguish vain;

And on Creüsa piteously calling,

Woke the lamenting echoes o’er and o’er. ⁠1035

While on this quest I roamed the city through,

Of reason reft, there rose upon my sight—

O shape of sorrow!—my Creüsa’s ghost,

Hers truly, though a loftier port it wore.

I quailed, my hair rose, and I gasped for fear; ⁠1040

But thus she spoke, and soothed my grief away:

“Why to these frenzied sorrows bend thy soul,

“O husband ever dear! The will of Heaven

“Hath brought all this to pass. Fate doth not send

“Creüsa the long journeys thou shalt take, ⁠1045

“Nor hath th’ Olympian King so given decree.

“Long is thy banishment; thy ship must plough

“The vast, far-spreading sea. Then shalt thou come

“Unto Hesperia, whose fruitful plains

“Are watered by the Tiber, Lydian stream, ⁠1050

“Of smooth, benignant flow. Thou shalt obtain

“Fair fortunes, and a throne and royal bride.

“For thy beloved Creüsa weep no more!

“No Myrmidon’s proud palace waits me now;

“Dolopian shall not scorn, nor Argive dames ⁠1055

“Command a slave of Dardan’s royal stem

“And wife to Venus’ son. On these loved shores

“The Mother of the Gods compels my stay.

“Farewell! farewell! O, cherish evermore

“Thy son and mine!”

⁠Her utterance scarce had ceased, ⁠1060

When, as I strove through tears to make reply,

She left me, and dissolved in empty air.

Thrice would my frustrate arms her form enfold;

Thrice from the clasp of hand that vision fled,

Like wafted winds and like a fleeting dream. ⁠1065



The night had passed, and to my friends once more

I made my way, much wondering to find

A mighty multitude assembled there

Of friends new-come,—matrons and men-at-arms,

And youth for exile bound,—a doleful throng. ⁠1070

From far and near they drew, their hearts prepared

And their possessions gathered, to sail forth

To lands unknown, wherever o’er the wave

I bade them follow.

⁠Now above the crest

Of loftiest Ida rose the morning-star, ⁠1075

Chief in the front of day. The Greeks held fast

The captive gates of Troy. No help or hope

Was ours any more. Then, yielding all,

And lifting once again my aged sire,

For refuge to the distant hills I fled. ⁠1080





When Asia’s power and Priam’s race and throne,

Though guiltless, were cast down by Heaven’s decree,

When Ilium proud had fallen, and Neptune’s Troy

In smouldering ash lay level with the ground,

To wandering exile then and regions wild ⁠5

The gods by many an augury and sign

Compelled us forth. We fashioned us a fleet

Within Antander’s haven, in the shade

Of Phrygian Ida’s peak (though knowing not

Whither our fate would drive, or where afford ⁠10

A resting-place at last), and my small band

Of warriors I arrayed.

⁠As soon as smiled

The light of summer’s prime, my reverend sire

Anchises bade us on the winds of Fate

To spread all sail. Through tears I saw recede ⁠15

My native shore, the haven and the plains

Where once was Troy. An exile on the seas,

With son and followers and household shrines,

And Troy’s great guardian-gods, I took my way.



There is a far-off land where warriors breed, ⁠20

Where Thracians till the boundless plains, and where

The cruel-eyed Lycurgus once was king.

Troy’s old ally it was, its deities

Had brotherhood with ours before our fall.

Thither I fared, and on its winding shores ⁠25

Set my first walls, though partial Fate opposed

Our entrance there. In memory of my name

I called its people the Æneadæ.

Unto Dione’s daughter, and all gods

Who blessed our young emprise, due gifts were paid; ⁠30

And unto the supreme celestial King

I slew a fair white bull beside the sea.

But haply near my place of sacrifice

A mound was seen, and on the summit grew

A copse of cornel and a myrtle tree, ⁠35

With spear-like limbs outbranched on every side.

This I approached, and tried to rend away

From its deep roots that grove of gloomy green,

And dress my altars in its leafy boughs.

But, horrible to tell, a prodigy ⁠40

Smote my astonished eyes: for the first time,

Which from the earth with broken roots I drew,

Dripped black with bloody drops, and gave the ground

Dark stains of gore. Cold horror shook my frame,

And every vein within me froze for fear. ⁠45

Once more I tried from yet another stock

The pliant stem to tear, and to explore

The mystery within,—but yet again

The foul bark oozed with clots of blackest gore!

From my deep-shaken soul I made a prayer ⁠50

To all the woodland nymphs and to divine

Gradivus, patron of the Thracian plain,

To bless this sight, to lift its curse away.

But when at a third sheaf of myrtle spears

I fell upon my knees, and tugged amain ⁠55

Against the adverse ground (I dread to tell!),

A moaning and a wail from that deep grave

Burst forth and murmured in my listening ear:

“Why wound me, great Æneas, in my woe?

“O, spare the dead, nor let thy holy hands ⁠60

“Do sacrilege and sin! I, Trojan-born,

“Was kin of thine. This blood is not of trees.

“Haste from this murderous shore, this land of greed.

“O, I am Polydorus! Haste away!

“Here was I pierced; a crop of iron spears ⁠65

“Has grown up o’er my breast, and multiplied

“To all these deadly javelins, keen and strong.”

Then stood I, burdened with dark doubt and fear

I quailed, my hair rose and my utterance choked.

For once this Polydorus, with much gold, ⁠70

Ill-fated Priam sent by stealth away

For nurture with the Thracian king, what time

Dardania’s war looked hopeless, and her towers

Were ringed about by unrelenting siege.

That king, when Ilium’s cause was ebbing low, ⁠75

And fortune frowned, gave o’er his plighted faith

To Agamemnon’s might and victory;

He scorned all honor and did murder foul

On Polydorus, seizing lawlessly

On all the gold. O, whither at thy will, ⁠80

Curst greed of gold, may mortal hearts be driven?



Soon as my shuddering ceased, I told this tale

Of prodigies before the people’s chiefs,

Who sat in conclave with my kingly sire,

And bade them speak their reverend counsel forth. ⁠85

All found one voice; to leave that land of sin,

Where foul abomination had profaned

A stranger’s right; and once more to resign

Our fleet unto the tempest and the wave.

But fit and solemn funeral rites were paid ⁠90

To Polydorus. A high mound we reared

Of heaped-up earth, and to his honored shade

Built a perpetual altar, sadly drest

In cypress dark and purple pall of woe.

Our Ilian women wailed with loosened hair; ⁠95

New milk was sprinkled from a foaming cup,

And from the shallow bowl fresh blood out-poured

Upon the sacred ground. So in its tomb

We laid his ghost to rest, and loudly sang,

With prayer for peace, the long, the last farewell. ⁠100



After these things, when first the friendly sea

Looked safe and fair, and o’er its tranquil plain

Light-whispering breezes bade us launch away,

My men drew down our galleys to the brine,

Thronging the shore. Soon out of port we ran, ⁠105

And watched the hills and cities fading far.



There is a sacred island in mid-seas,

To fruitful Doris and to Neptune dear,

Which grateful Phœbus, wielder of the bow,

The while it drifted loose from land to land, ⁠110

Chained firmly where the crags of Gyaros

And Myconos uptower, and bade it rest

Immovable, in scorn of wind and wave.

Thither I sped; by this my weary ships

Found undisturbed retreat and haven fair. ⁠115

To land we came and saw with reverent eyes

Apollo’s citadel. King Anius,

His people’s king, and priest at Phœbus’ fane,

Came forth to meet us, wearing on his brow

The fillets and a holy laurel crown. ⁠120

Unto Anchises he gave greeting kind,

Claimed old acquaintance, grasped us by the hand,

And bade us both his roof and welcome share.



Then, kneeling at the shrine of time-worn stone:

“Thou who at Thymbra on the Trojan shore ⁠125

“Hast often blessed my prayer, O, give to me

“A hearth and home, and to this war-worn band

“Defensive towers and offspring multiplied

“In an abiding city; give to Troy

“A second citadel, that shall survive ⁠130

“Achilles’ wrath and all our Argive foe.

“Whom shall we follow? Whither lies our way?

“Where wilt thou grant us an abiding-place?

“Send forth, O King, thy voice oracular,

“And on our spirits move.” Scarce had I spoke ⁠135

When sudden trembling through the laurels ran

And smote the holy portals; far and wide

The mighty ridges of the mountain shook,

And from the opening shrine the tripod moaned.

Prostrate to earth we fall, as on our ears ⁠140

This utterance breaks: “O breed of iron men,

“Ye sons of Dardanus! the self-same land

“Where bloomed at first your far-descended stem

“Shall to its bounteous bosom draw ye home.

“Seek out your ancient Mother! There at last ⁠145

“Æneas’ race shall reign on every shore,

“And his sons’ sons, and all their house to be.”



So Phœbus spoke; and mighty joy uprose

From all my thronging people, who would know

Where Phœbus’ city lay, and whitherward ⁠150

The god ordained the wandering tribe’s return.

Then spake my father, pondering olden days

And sacred memories of heroes gone:

“Hear, chiefs and princes, what your hopes shall be!

“The Isle of Crete, abode of lofty Jove, ⁠155

“Rests in the middle sea. Thence Ida soars;

“There is the cradle of our race. It boasts

“A hundred cities, seats of fruitful power.

“Thence our chief sire, if duly I recall

“The olden tale, King Teucer sprung, who first ⁠160

“Touched on the Trojan shore, and chose his seat

“Of kingly power. There was no Ilium then

“Nor towered Pergama; in lowly vales

“Their dwelling; hence the ancient worship given

“To the Protectress of Mount Cybele, ⁠165

“Mother of Gods, what time in Ida’s grove

“The brazen Corybantic cymbals clang.

“Or sacred silence guards her mystery,

“And lions yoked her royal chariot draw.

“Up, then, and follow the behests divine! ⁠170

“Pour offering to the winds, and point your keels

“Unto that realm of Minos. It is near.

“If Jove but bless, the third day’s dawn should see

“Our ships at Cretan land.”

⁠So, having said,

He slew the victims for each altar’s praise. ⁠175

A bull to Neptune, and a bull to thee,

O beauteous Apollo! A black lamb

Unto the clouds and storms; but fleece and snow

To the mild zephyrs was our offering.



The tale was told us that Idomeneus, ⁠180

From his hereditary kingdom driven,

Had left his Crete abandoned, that no foe

Now harbored there, but all its dwellings lay

Untenanted of man. So forth we sailed

Out of the port of Delos, and sped far ⁠185

Along the main. The mænad-haunted hills

Of Naxos came in view; the ridges green

Of fair Donysa, with Olearos,

And Paros, gleaming white, and Cyclades

Scattered among the waves, as close we ran ⁠190

Where thick-strewn islands vex the channelled seas.

With rival shout the sailors cheerly called:

“On, comrades! On, to Crete and to our sires!”

Freely behind us blew the friendly winds,

And gave smooth passage to that fabled shore, ⁠195

The land of the Curetes, friends of Jove.

There eagerly I labored at the walls

Of our long-prayed-for city; and its name

Was Pergamea; to my Trojan band,

Pleased with such name, I gave command to build ⁠200

Altar and hearth, and raise the lofty tower.

But scarce the ships were beached along the strand

(While o’er the isle my busy mariners

Ploughed in new fields and took them wives once more,—

I giving homes and laws) when suddenly ⁠205

A pestilence from some infectious sky

Seized on man’s flesh, and horribly exhaled

O’er trees and crops a fatal year of plague.

Some breathed their last, while others weak and worn

Lived on; the dog-star parched the barren fields; ⁠210

Grass withered, and the sickly, mouldering corn

Refused us life. My aged father then

Bade us re-cross the waves and re-implore

Apollo’s mercy at his island shrine;

If haply of our weariness and woe ⁠215

He might vouchsafe the end, or bid us find

Help for our task, or guidance o’er the sea.



’T was night, and sleep possessed all breathing things;

When, lo! the sacred effigies divine,

The Phrygian gods which through the flames I bore ⁠220

From fallen Troy, seemed in a vision clear

To stand before me where I slumbering lay,

Bathed in bright beams which from the moon at full

Streamed through the latticed wall: and thus they spoke

To soothe my care away. “Apollo’s word, ⁠225

“Which in far Delos the god meant for thee,

“Is uttered here. Behold, he sends ourselves

“To this thy house, before thy prayer is made.

“We from Troy’s ashes have companioned thee

“In every fight; and we the swollen seas, ⁠230

“Guided by thee, in thine own ships have crossed;

“Our prayer divine shall set among the stars

“Thy seed to be, and to thy city give

“Dominion evermore. For mighty men

“Go build its mighty walls! Seek not to shun ⁠235

“The hard, long labors of an exile’s way.

“Change this abode! Not thine this Cretan shore,

“Nor here would Delian Phœbus have thee bide.

“There is a land the roving Greeks have named

“Hesperia. It is a storied realm ⁠240

“Made mighty by great wars and fruitful glebe.

“Œnotrians had it, and their sons, ’t is said,

“Have called it Italy, a chieftain’s name

“To a whole region given. That land alone

“Our true abode can be; for Dardanus ⁠245

“Was cradled there, and old Iasius,

“The venerated sire of all our line.

“Arise! go forth and cheer thy father gray

“With the glad tidings! Bid him doubt no more!

“Ausonia seek and Corythus; for Jove ⁠250

“Denies this Cretan realm to thine and thee.”



I marvelled at the heavenly presences

So vocal and so bright, for ’t was not sleep;

But face to face I deemed I could discern

Each countenance august and holy brow, ⁠255

Each mantled head; and from my body ran

Cold sweat of awe. From my low couch I sprang,

Lifting to heaven my suppliant hands and prayer,

And o’er my hearth poured forth libations free.

After th’ auspicious offering, I told ⁠260

Anchises the whole tale in order due.



He owned our stock two-branched, of our great sires

The twofold line, and that his thought had strayed,

In new confusion mingling ancient names;

Then spoke: “O son, in Ilium’s doom severe ⁠265

“Afflicted ever! To my ears alone

“This dark vicissitude Cassandra sang.

“I mind me now that her wild tongue foretold

“Such destiny. For oft she called aloud

“‘Hesperia!’ oft ‘Italia’s kingdom!’ called. ⁠270

“But who had faith that Teucer’s sons should come

“To far Hesperia? What mortal ear

“Gave heed to sad Cassandra’s voice divine?

“Now Phœbus speaks. Obedient let us be,

“And, warned by him, our happier lot pursue!” ⁠275



He spoke: with heart of hope we all obeyed;

Again we changed abode; and, leaving there

A feeble few, again with spreading sails

We coursed in hollow ship the spacious sea.

When from the deep the shores had faded far, ⁠280

And only sky and sea were round our way,

Full in the zenith hung a purple cloud,

Storm-laden, dark as night, and every wave

Grew black and angry, while perpetual gales

Came rolling o’er the main, and mountain-high ⁠285

The wreckful surges rose; our ships were hurled

Wide o’er the whirling waters; thunder-clouds

And misty murk of night made end of all

The light of heaven, save where the rifted storm

Flashed with the oft-reiterate shaft of Jove. ⁠290

Then went we drifting, beaten from our course,

Upon a trackless sea. Not even the eyes

Of Palinurus could tell night from noon

Or ken our way. Three days of blinding dark,

Three nights without a star, we roved the seas; ⁠295

The fourth, land seemed to rise. Far distant hills

And rolling smoke we saw. Down came our sails,

Out flew the oars, and with prompt stroke the crews

Swept the dark waves and tossed the crested foam.



From such sea-peril safe, I made the shores ⁠300

Of Strophades,—a name the Grecians gave

To islands in the broad Ionic main,—

The Strophades, where dread Celæno bides,

With other Harpies, who had quit the halls

Of stricken Phineus, and for very fear ⁠305

Fled from the routed feast; no prodigy

More vile than these, nor plague more pitiless

Ere rose by wrath divine from Stygian wave;

Birds seem they, but with face like woman-kind;

Foul-flowing bellies, hands covered with crooked claws, ⁠310

And ghastly lips they have, with hunger pale.

Scarce had we made the haven, when, behold!

Fair herds of cattle roaming a wide plain,

And horned goats, untended, feeding free

In pastures green, surprised our happy eyes. ⁠315

With eager blades we ran to take and slay,

Asking of every god, and chiefly Jove,

To share the welcome prize: we ranged a feast,

With turf-built couches and a banquet-board

Along the curving strand. But in a trice, ⁠320

Down from the high hills swooping horribly,

The Harpies loudly shrieking, flapped their wings,

Snatched at our meats, and with infectious touch

Polluted all; infernal was their cry,

The stench most vile. Once more in covert far ⁠325

Beneath a caverned rock, and close concealed

With trees and branching shade, we raised aloft

Our tables, altars, and rekindled fires.

Once more from haunts unknown the clamorous flock

From every quarter flew, and seized its prey ⁠330

With taloned feet and carrion lip most foul.

I called my mates to arms and opened war

On that accursed brood. My band obeyed;

And, hiding in deep grass their swords and shields,

In ambush lay. But presently the foe ⁠335

Swept o’er the winding shore with loud alarm:

Then from a sentry-crag, Misenus blew

A signal on his hollow horn. My men

Flew to the combat strange, and fain would wound

With martial steel those foul birds of the sea; ⁠340

But on their sides no wounding blade could fall,

Nor any plume be marred. In swiftest flight

To starry skies they soared, and left on earth

Their half-gnawed, stolen feast, and footprints foul.

Celæno only on a beetling crag ⁠345

Took lofty perch, and, prophetess of ill,

Shrieked malediction from her vulture breast:

“Because of slaughtered kine and ravished herd,

“Sons of Laomedon, have ye made war?

“And will ye from their rightful kingdom drive ⁠350

“The guiltless Harpies? Hear, O, hear my word

“(Long in your bosoms may it rankle sore!)

“Which Jove omnipotent to Phœbus gave,

“Phœbus gave to me: a word of doom, which I,

“The Furies’ elder sister, here unfold: ⁠355

“‘To Italy ye fare. The willing winds

“‘Your call have heard; and ye shall have your prayer

“‘In some Italian haven safely moored.

“‘But never shall ye rear the circling walls

“‘Of your own city, till for this our blood ⁠360

“‘By you unjustly spilt, your famished jaws

“‘Bite at your tables, aye,—and half devour.’”

She spoke: her pinions bore her to the grove,

And she was seen no more. But all my band

Shuddered with shock of fear in each cold vein; ⁠365

Their drooping spirits trusted swords no more,

But turned to prayers and offerings, asking grace,

Scarce knowing if those creatures were divine,

Or but vast birds, ill-omened and unclean.



Father Anchises to the gods in heaven ⁠370

Uplifted suppliant hands, and on that shore

Due ritual made, crying aloud; “Ye gods

“Avert this curse, this evil turn away!

“Smile, Heaven, upon your faithful votaries.”

Then bade he launch away, the chain undo, ⁠375

Set every cable free and spread all sail.

O’er the white waves we flew, and took our way

Where’er the helmsman or the winds could guide.

Now forest-clad Zacynthus met our gaze,

Engirdled by the waves; Dulichium, ⁠380

Samè, and Neritos, a rocky steep,

Uprose. We passed the cliffs of Ithaca

That called Laertes king, and flung our curse

On fierce Ulysses’ hearth and native land.

Nigh hoar Lucate’s clouded crest we drew, ⁠385

Where Phœbus’ temple, feared by mariners,

Loomed o’er us; thitherward we steered and reached

The little port and town. Our weary fleet

Dropped anchor, and lay beached along the strand.

So, safe at land, our hopeless peril past, ⁠390

We offered thanks to Jove, and kindled high

His altars with our feast and sacrifice;

Then, gathering on Actium’s holy shore,

Made fair solemnities of pomp and game.

My youth, anointing their smooth, naked limbs, ⁠395

Wrestled our wonted way. For glad were we,

Who past so many isles of Greece had sped

And ’scaped our circling foes. Now had the sun

Rolled through the year’s full circle, and the waves

Were rough with icy winter’s northern gales. ⁠400

I hung for trophy on that temple door

A swelling shield of brass (which once was worn

By mighty Abas) graven with this line:

Spoil of Æneas from triumphant foes.



Then from that haven I command them forth; ⁠405

My good crews take the thwarts, smiting the sea

With rival strokes, and skim the level main.

Soon sank Phæacia’s wind-swept citadels

Out of our view; we skirted the bold shores

Of proud Epirus, in Chaonian land, ⁠410

And made Buthrotum’s port and towering town.

Here wondrous tidings met us, that the son

Of Priam, Helenus, held kingly sway

O’er many Argive cities, having wed

The Queen of Pyrrhus, great Achilles’ son, ⁠415

And gained his throne; and that Andromache

Once more was wife unto a kindred lord.

Amazement held me; all my bosom burned

To see the hero’s face and hear this tale

Of strange vicissitude. So up I climbed, ⁠420

Leaving the haven, fleet, and friendly shore.



That self-same hour outside the city walls,

Within a grove where flowed the mimic stream

Of a new Simois, Andromache,

With offerings to the dead, and gifts of woe, ⁠425

Poured forth libation, and invoked the shade

Of Hector, at a tomb which her fond grief

Had consecrated to perpetual tears,

Though void; a mound of fair green turf it stood,

And near it rose twin altars to his name. ⁠430

She saw me drawing near; our Trojan helms

Met her bewildered eyes, and, terror-struck

At the portentous sight, she swooning fell

And lay cold, rigid, lifeless, till at last,

Scarce finding voice, her lips addressed me thus: ⁠435

“Have I true vision? Bringest thou the word

“Of truth, O goddess-born? Art still in flesh?

“Or if sweet light be fled, my Hector, where?”

With flood of tears she spoke, and all the grove

Reëchoed to her cry. Scarce could I frame ⁠440

Brief answer to her passion, but replied

With broken voice and accents faltering:

“I live, ’tis true. I lengthen out my days

“Through many a desperate strait. But O, believe

“That what thine eyes behold is vision true. ⁠445

“Alas! what lot is thine, that wert unthroned

“From such a husband’s side? What after-fate

“Could give thee honor due? Andromache,

“Once Hector’s wife, is Pyrrhus still thy lord?”



“With drooping brows and lowly voice she cried: ⁠450

“O, happy only was that virgin blest,

“Daughter of Priam, summoned forth to die

“In sight of Ilium, on a foeman’s tomb!

“No casting of the lot her doom decreed,

“Nor came she to her conqueror’s couch a slave. ⁠455

“Myself from burning Ilium carried far

“O’er seas and seas, endured the swollen pride

“Of that young scion of Achilles’ race,

“And bore him as his slave a son. When he

“Sued for Hermione, of Leda’s line, ⁠460

“And nuptial-bond with Lacedæmon’s lords,

“I, the slave-wife, to Helenus was given,

“And slave was wed with slave. But afterward

“Orestes, crazed by loss of her he loved,

“And ever fury-driven from crime to crime, ⁠465

“Crept upon Pyrrhus in a careless hour

“And murdered him upon his own hearth-stone.

“Part of the realm of Neoptolemus

“Fell thus to Helenus, who called his lands

“Chaonian, and in Trojan Chaon’s name ⁠470

“His kingdom is Chaonia. Yonder height

“Is Pergamus, our Ilian citadel.

“What power divine did waft thee to our shore,

“Not knowing whither? Tell me of the boy

“Ascanius! Still breathes he earthly air? ⁠475

“In Troy she bore him—is he mourning still

“That mother ravished from his childhood’s eyes?

“What ancient valor stirs the manly soul

“Of thine own son, of Hector’s sister’s child?”



Thus poured she forth full many a doleful word ⁠480

With unavailing tears. But as she ceased,

Out of the city gates appeared the son

Of Priam, Helenus, with princely train.

He welcomed us as kin, and glad at heart

Gave guidance to his house, though oft his words ⁠485

Fell faltering and few, with many a tear.

Soon to a humbler Troy I lift my eyes,

And of a mightier Pergamus discern

The towering semblance; there a scanty stream

Runs on in Xanthus’ name, and my glad arms ⁠490

The pillars of a Scæan gate embrace.

My Teucrian mariners with welcome free

Enjoyed the friendly town; his ample halls

Our royal host threw wide; full wine-cups flowed

Within the palace; golden feast was spread, ⁠495

And many a goblet quaffed. Day followed day,

While favoring breezes beckoned us to sea,

And swelled the waiting canvas as they blew.

Then to the prophet-priest I made this prayer:



“Offspring of Troy, interpreter of Heaven! ⁠500

“Who knowest Phœbus’ power, and readest well

“The tripod, stars, and vocal laurel leaves

“To Phœbus dear, who know’st of every bird

“The ominous swift wing or boding song,

“O, speak! For all my course good omens showed, ⁠505

“And every god admonished me to sail

“In quest of Italy’s far-distant shores;

“But lone Celæno, heralding strange woe,

“Foretold prodigious horror, vengeance dark,

“And vile, unnatural hunger. How elude ⁠510

“Such perils? Or by what hard duty done

“May such huge host of evils vanquished be?”



Then Helenus, with sacrifice of kine

In order due, implored the grace of Heaven,

Unloosed the fillets from his sacred brow, ⁠515

And led me, Phœbus, to thy temple’s door,

Awed by th’ o’er-brooding godhead, whose true priest,

With lips inspired, made this prophetic song:



“O goddess-born, indubitably shines

“The blessing of great gods upon thy path ⁠520

“Across the sea; the heavenly King supreme

“Thy destiny ordains; ’t is he unfolds

“The grand vicissitude, which now pursues

“A course immutable. I will declare

“Of thy large fate a certain bounded part; ⁠525

“That fearless thou may’st view the friendly sea,

“And in Ausonia’s haven at the last

“Find thee a fixed abode. Than this no more

“The Sister Fates to Helenus unveil,

“And Juno, Saturn’s daughter, grants no more. ⁠530

“First, that Italia (which nigh at hand

“Thou deemst, and wouldst fondly enter in

“By yonder neighboring bays) lies distant far

“O’er trackless course and long, with interval

“Of far-extended lands. Thine oars must ply ⁠535

“The waves of Sicily; thy fleet must cleave

“The large expanse of that Ausonian brine;

“The waters of Avernus thou shalt see,

“And that enchanted island where abides

“Ææan Circe, ere on tranquil shore ⁠540

“Thou mayest plant thy nation. Lo! a sign

“I tell thee; hide this wonder in thy heart:

“Beside a certain stream’s sequestered wave,

“Thy troubled eyes, in shadowy ilex grove

“That fringes on the river, shall descry ⁠545

“A milk-white, monstrous sow, with teeming brood

“Of thirty young, new littered, white like her,

“All clustering at her teats, as prone she lies.

“There is thy city’s safe, predestined ground,

“And there thy labors’ end. Vex not thy heart ⁠550

“About those ‘tables bitten,’ for kind fate

“Thy path will show, and Phœbus bless thy prayer.

“But from these lands and yon Italian shore,

“Where from this sea of ours the tide sweeps in,

“Escape and flee, for all its cities hold ⁠555

“Pernicious Greeks, thy foes: the Locri there

“Have builded walls; the wide Sallentine fields

“Are filled with soldiers of Idomeneus;

“There Melibœan Philoctetes’ town,

“Petilia, towers above its little wall. ⁠560

“Yea, even when thy fleet has crossed the main,

“And from new altars built along the shore

“Thy vows to Heaven are paid, throw o’er thy head

“A purple mantle, veiling well thy brows,

“Lest, while the sacrificial fire ascends ⁠565

“In offering to the gods, thine eye behold

“Some face of foe, and every omen fail.

“Let all thy people keep this custom due,

“And thou thyself be faithful; let thy seed

“Forever thus th’ immaculate rite maintain. ⁠570



“After departing hence, thou shalt be blown

“Toward Sicily, and strait Pelorus’ bounds

“Will open wide. Then take the leftward way:

“Those leftward waters in long circuit sweep,

“Far from that billowy coast, the opposing side. ⁠575

“These regions, so they tell, in ages gone

“By huge and violent convulsion riven

“(Such mutability is wrought by time),

“Sprang wide asunder; where the doubled strand

“Sole and continuous lay, the sea’s vast power ⁠580

“Burst in between, and bade its waves divide

“Hesperia’s bosom from fair Sicily,

“While with a straitened firth it interflowed

“Their fields and cities sundered shore from shore.

“The right side Scylla keeps; the left is given ⁠585

“To pitiless Charybdis, who draws down

“To the wild whirling of her steep abyss

“The monster waves, and ever and anon

“Flings them at heaven, to lash the tranquil stars.

“But Scylla, prisoned in her eyeless cave, ⁠590

“Thrusts forth her face, and pulls upon the rocks

“Ship after ship; the parts that first be seen

“Are human; a fair-breasted virgin she,

“Down to the womb; but all that lurks below

“Is a huge-membered fish, where strangely join ⁠595

“The flukes of dolphins and the paunch of wolves.

“Better by far to round the distant goal

“Of the Trinacrian headlands, veering wide

“From thy true course, than ever thou shouldst see

“That shapeless Scylla in her vaulted cave, ⁠600

“Where grim rocks echo her dark sea-dogs’ roar.

“Yea, more, if aught of prescience be bestowed

“On Helenus, if trusted prophet he,

“And Phœbus to his heart true voice have given,

“O goddess-born, one counsel chief of all ⁠605

“I tell thee oft, and urge it o’er and o’er.

“To Juno’s godhead lift thy loudest prayer;

“To Juno chant a fervent votive song,

“And with obedient offering persuade

“That potent Queen. So shalt thou, triumphing, ⁠610

“To Italy be sped, and leave behind

“Trinacria. When wafted to that shore,

“Repair to Cumæ’s hill, and to the Lake

“Avernus with its whispering grove divine.

“There shalt thou see a frenzied prophetess, ⁠615

“Who from beneath the hollow scarpèd crag

“Sings oracles, or characters on leaves

“Mysterious names. Whate’er the virgin writes,

“On leaves inscribing the portentous song,

“She sets in order, and conceals them well ⁠620

“In her deep cave, where they abide unchanged

“In due array. Yet not a care has she,

“If with some swinging hinge a breeze sweeps in,

“To catch them as they whirl: if open door

“Disperse them fluttering through the hollow rock, ⁠625

“She will not link their shifted sense anew,

“Nor re-invent her fragmentary song.

“Oft her answered votaries depart,

“Scorning the Sibyl’s shrine. But deem not thou

“Thy tarrying too long, whate’er thy stay. ⁠630

“Though thy companions chide, though winds of power

“Invite thy ship to sea, and well would speed

“The swelling sail, yet to that Sibyl go.

“Pray that her own lips may sing forth for thee

“The oracles, uplifting her dread voice ⁠635

“In willing prophecy. Her rede shall tell

“Of Italy, its wars and tribes to be,

“And of what way each burden and each woe

“May be escaped, or borne. Her favoring aid

“Will grant swift, happy voyages to thy prayer. ⁠640

“Such counsels Heaven to my lips allows.

“Arise, begone! and by thy glorious deeds

“Set Troy among the stars!”



So spake the prophet with benignant voice.

Then gifts he bade be brought of heavy gold ⁠645

And graven ivory, which to our ships

He bade us bear; each bark was loaded full

With massy silver and Dodona’s pride

Of brazen cauldrons; a cuirass he gave

Of linkèd gold enwrought and triple chain; ⁠650

A noble helmet, too, with flaming crest

And lofty cone, th’ accoutrement erewhile

Of Neoptolemus. My father too

Had fit gifts from the King; whose bounty then

Gave steeds and riders; and new gear was sent ⁠655

To every sea-worn ship, while he supplied

Seafarers’ kit to all my loyal crews.



Anchises bade us speedily set sail,

Nor lose a wind so fair; and answering him,

Apollo’s priest made reverent adieu: ⁠660

“Anchises, honored by the love sublime

“Of Venus’ self and twice in safety borne

“From falling Troy, chief care of kindly Heaven,

“Th’ Ausonian shore is thine. Sail thitherward!

“For thou art pre-ordained to travel far ⁠665

“O’er yonder seas; far in the distance lies

“That region of Ausonia, Phœbus’ voice

“To thee made promise of. Onward, I say,

“O blest in the exceeding loyal love

“Of thy dear son! Why keep thee longer now? ⁠670

“Why should my words yon gathering winds detain?”

Likewise Andromache in mournful guise

Took last farewell, bringing embroidered robes

Of golden woof; a princely Phrygian cloak

She gave Ascanius, vying with the King ⁠675

In gifts of honor; and threw o’er the boy

The labors of her loom, with words like these:

“Accept these gifts, sweet youth, memorials

“Of me and my poor handicraft, to prove

“Th’ undying friendship of Andromache, ⁠680

“Once Hector’s wife. Take these last offerings

“Of those who are thy kin—O thou that art

“Of my Astyanax in all this world

“The only image! His thy lovely eyes!

“Thy hands, thy lips, are even what he bore, ⁠685

“And like thy own his youthful bloom would be.”



Thus I made answer, turning to depart

With rising tears: “Live on, and be ye blessed,

“Whose greatness is accomplished! As for me,

“From change to change Fate summons, and I go; ⁠690

“But ye have won repose. No leagues of sea

“Await your cleaving keel. Not yours the quest

“Of fading Italy’s delusive shore.

“Here a new Xanthus and a second Troy

“Your labor fashioned and your eyes may see— ⁠695

“More blest, I trust, less tempting to our foes!

“If e’er on Tiber and its bordering vales

“I safely enter, and these eyes behold

“Our destined walls, then in fraternal bond

“Let our two nations live, whose mutual boast ⁠700

“Is one Dardanian blood, one common story.

“Epirus with Hesperia shall be

“One Troy in heart and soul. But this remains

“For our sons’ sons the happy task and care.”

Forth o’er the seas we sped and kept our course ⁠705

Nigh the Ceraunian headland, where begins

The short sea-passage unto Italy.

Soon sank the sun, while down the shadowed hills

Stole deeper gloom; then making shore, we flung

Our bodies on a dry, sea-bordering sand, ⁠710

Couched on earth’s welcome breast; the oars were ranged

In order due; the tides of slumber dark

O’erflowed our lives. But scarce the chariot

Of Night, on wings of swift, obedient Hours,

Had touched the middle sky, when wakeful sprang ⁠715

Good Palinurus from his pillowed stone:

With hand at ear he caught each airy gust

And questioned of the winds; the gliding stars

He called by name, as onward they advanced

Through the still heaven; Arcturus he beheld, ⁠720

The Hyades, rain-bringers, the twin Bears,

And vast Orion girt in golden arms.

He blew a trumpet from his ship; our camp

Stirred to the signal for embarking; soon

We rode the seas once more with swelling sail. ⁠725



Scarce had Aurora’s purple from the sky

Warned off the stars, when lying very low

Along th’ horizon, the dimmed hills we saw

Of Italy; Achates first gave cry

“Italia!” with answering shouts of joy, ⁠730

My comrades’ voices cried, “Italia, hail!”

Anchises, then, wreathed a great bowl with flowers

And filled with wine, invoking Heaven to bless,

And thus he prayed from our ship’s lofty stern:

“O lords of land and sea and every storm! ⁠735

“Breathe favoring breezes for our onward way!”

Fresh blew the prayed-for winds. A haven fair

Soon widened near us; and its heights were crowned

By a Greek fane to Pallas. Yet my men

Furled sail and shoreward veered the pointing prow. ⁠740



The port receding from the orient wave

Is curved into a bow; on either side

The jutting headlands toss the salt sea-foam

And hide the bay itself. Like double wall

The towered crags send down protecting arms, ⁠745

While distant from the shore the temple stands.

Here on a green sward, the first omen given,

I saw four horses grazing through the field,

Each white as snow. Father Anchises cried:

“Is war thy gift, O new and alien land? ⁠750

“Horses make war; of war these creatures bode.

“Yet oft before the chariot of peace

“Their swift hoofs go, and on their necks they bear

“Th’ obedient yoke and rein. Therefore a hope

“Of peace is also ours.” Then we implored ⁠755

Minerva’s mercy, at her sacred shrine,

The mail-clad goddess who gave welcome there;

And at an altar, mantling well our brows

The Phrygian way, as Helenus ordained,

We paid the honors his chief counsel urged, ⁠760

With blameless rite, to Juno, Argive Queen.

No tarrying now, but after sacrifice

We twirled the sailyards and shook out all sail,

Leaving the cities of the sons of Greece

And that distrusted land. Tarentum’s bay ⁠765

Soon smiled before us, town of Hercules,

If fame be true; opposing it uptowers

Lacinia’s headland unto Juno dear,

The heights of Caulon, and that sailor’s bane,

Ship-shattering Scylaceum. Thence half seen, ⁠770

Trinacrian Ætna cleaves th’ horizon line;

We hear from far the crash of shouting seas,

Where lifted billows leap the tide-swept sand.



Father Anchises cried: “’Tis none but she—

“Charybdis! Helenus this reef foretold, ⁠775

“And rocks of dreadful name. O, fly, my men!

“Rise like one man with long, strong sweep of oars!”

Not unobedient they! First Palinure

Veered to the leftward wave the willing keel,

And sails and oars together leftward strove. ⁠780

We shot to skyward on the arching surge,

Then, as she sank, dropped deeper than the grave;

Thrice bellowed the vast cliffs from vaulted wall;

Thrice saw we spouted foam and showers of stars.



After these things both wind and sun did fail; ⁠785

And weary, worn, not witting of our way,

We drifted shoreward to the Cyclops’ land.

A spreading bay is there, impregnable

To all invading storms; and Ætna’s throat

With roar of frightful ruin thunders nigh. ⁠790

Now to the realm of light it lifts a cloud

Of pitch-black, whirling smoke, and fiery dust,

Shooting out globes of flame, with monster tongues

That lick the stars; now huge crags of itself,

Out of the bowels of the mountain torn, ⁠795

Its maw disgorges, while the molten rock

Rolls screaming skyward; from the nether deep

The fathomless abyss makes ebb and flow.

Enceladus, his body lightning-scarred,

Lies prisoned under all, so runs the tale: ⁠800

O’er him gigantic Ætna breathes in fire

From crack and seam; and if he haply turn

To change his wearied side, Trinacria’s isle

Trembles and moans, and thick fumes mantle heaven.



That night in screen and covert of a grove ⁠805

We bore the dire convulsion, unaware

Whence the loud horror came. For not a star

Its lamp allowed, but all was gloom,

And frowning night confined the moon in cloud.



When from the eastern waves the light of morn ⁠810

Began to peer, and from the upper sky

Aurora flamed away the dark and dew,

Out of the forest sprang a startling shape

Of hunger-wasted misery; a man

In wretched guise, who shoreward came with hands ⁠815

Outstretched in supplication. We turned back

And scanned him well. All grime and foulness he,

With long and tangled beard, his savage garb

Fastened with thorns; but in all else he seemed

A Greek, and in his country’s league of arms ⁠820

Sent to the siege of Troy. When he beheld

The Dardan habit, and our Trojan steel,

He somewhat paused, as if in dread dismay

Such sight to see, and falteringly moved;

But soon with headlong steps he sought the shore, ⁠825

Ejaculating broken sobs and prayers:

“By stars above! By gods on high! O, hear!

“By this bright heavenly air we mortals breathe,

“Save me, sweet Trojans! Carry me away

“Unto what land ye will! I ask no more. ⁠830

“I came, I know it, in the ships of Greece;

“And I did war, ’t is true, with Ilium’s gods.

“O, if the crime deserve it, fling my corse

“On yonder waves, and in the boundless brine

“Sink me forever! Give me in my death ⁠835

“The comfort that by human hands I die.”



He clasped our knees, and writhing on his own

Clung fast. We bid him tell his race and name,

And by what fate pursued. Anchises gave

His own right hand in swift and generous aid, ⁠840

And by prompt token cheered the exile’s heart,

Who, banishing his fears, poured forth this tale:—



“My home was Ithaca, and I partook

“The fortunes of Ulysses evil-starred.

“My name is Achemenides, my sire ⁠845

“Was Adamastus, and I sailed for Troy,

“Being so poor,—O, that I ne’er had changed

“The lot I bore! In yon vast Cyclops’ cave

“My comrades, flying from its gruesome door,

“Left me behind, forgotten. ’T is a house ⁠850

“Of gory feasts of flesh, ’t is deep and dark,

“And vaulted high. He looms as high as heaven;

“I pray the blessèd gods to rid the earth

“Of the vile monster! None can look on him,

“None speak with him. He feeds on clotted gore ⁠855

“Of disembowelled men. These very eyes

“Saw him seize two of our own company,

“And, as he lolled back in the cave, he clutched

“And dashed them on the stones, fouling the floor

“With torrent of their blood; myself I saw him ⁠860

“Crunch with his teeth the dripping, bloody limbs

“Still hot and pulsing on his hungry jaw.

“But not without reward! For such a sight

“Ulysses would not brook, and Ithaca

“Forgot not in such strait the name he bore. ⁠865

“For soon as, gorged with feasting and o’ercome

“With drunken slumber, the foul giant lay

“Sprawled through the cave, his head dropped helpless down,

“Disgorging as he slept thick drool of gore

“And gobbets drenched with bloody wine; then we, ⁠870

“Calling on Heaven and taking place by lot,

“Drew round him like one man, and with a beam

“Sharpened at end bored out that monster eye,

“Which, huge and sole, lay under the grim brow,

“Round as an Argive shield or Phœbus’ star. ⁠875

“Thus took we joyful vengeance for the shades

“Of our lost mates. But, O ill-fated men!

“Fly, I implore, and cut the cables free

“Along the beach! For in the land abide,

“Like Polyphemus, who in hollow cave ⁠880

“Kept fleecy sheep, and milked his fruitful ewes,

“A hundred other, huge as he, who rove

“Wide o’er this winding shore and mountains fair:

“Cyclops accursèd, bestial! Thrice the moon

“Has filled her horns with light, while here I dwell ⁠885

“In lonely woods and lairs of creatures wild;

“Or from tall cliffs out-peering I discern

“The Cyclops, and shrink shuddering from the sound

“Of their vast step and cry. My sorry fare

“Is berries and hard cornels dropped from trees, ⁠890

“Or herb-roots torn out from the niggard ground.

“Though watching the whole sea, only to-day

“Have I had sight of ships. To you I fled.

“Whate’er ye be, it was my only prayer

“To ’scape that monster brood. I ask no more. ⁠895

“O, set me free by any death ye will!”



He scarce had said, when moving o’er the crest

Of a high hill a giant shape we saw:

That shepherd Polyphemus, with his flocks

Down-wending to the well-known water-side; ⁠900

Huge, shapeless, horrible, with blinded eye,

Bearing a lopped pine for a staff, he made

His footing sure, while the white, fleecy sheep,

Sole pleasure now, and solace of his woes,

Ran huddling at his side. ⁠905

Soon to the vast flood of the level brine

He came, and washed the flowing gore away

From that out-hollowed eye; he gnashed his teeth,

Groaning, and deep into the watery way

Stalked on, his tall bulk wet by scarce a wave. ⁠910

We fled in haste, though far, and with us bore

The truthful suppliant; cut silently

The anchor-ropes, and, bending to the oar,

Swept on with eager strokes clean out to sea.

Aware he was, and toward our loud halloo ⁠915

Whirled sudden round; but when no power had he

To seize or harm, nor could his fierce pursuit

O’ertake the Ionian surges as they rolled,

He raised a cry incredible; the sea

With all its billows trembled; the wide shore ⁠920

Of Italy from glens and gorges moaned,

And Ætna roared from every vaulted cave.

Then rallied from the grove-clad, lofty isle

The Cyclops’ clan, and lined the beach and bay.

We saw each lonely eyeball glare in vain, ⁠925

As side by side those brothers Ætna-born

Stood towering high, a conclave dark and dire:

As when, far up some mountain’s famous crest,

Wind-fronting oaks or cone-clad cypresses

Have made assembling in the solemn hills, ⁠930

Jove’s giant wood or Dian’s sacred grove.



We, terror-struck, would fly we knew not where,

With loosened sheet and canvas swelling strong

Before a welcome wind; but Helenus

Bade us both Scylla and Charybdis fear, ⁠935

Where ’twixt the twain death straitly hems the way;

And so the counsel was to veer our bark

The course it came. But lo! a northern gale

Burst o’er us from Pelorus’ narrowed side,

And on we rode far past Pantagia’s bay ⁠940

Of unhewn rock, and past the haven strong

Of Megara, and Thapsus lying low.

Such were the names retold, and such the shores

Shown us by Achemenides, whose fate

Made him familiar there, for he had sailed ⁠945

With evil-starred Ulysses o’er that sea.



Off the Sicilian shore an island lies,

Wave-washed Plemmyrium, called in olden days

Ortygia; here Alpheus, river-god,

From Elis flowed by secret sluice, they say, ⁠950

Beneath the sea, and mingles at thy mouth,

Fair Arethusa! with Sicilian waves.

Our voices hailed the great gods of the land

With reverent prayer; then skirted we the shore,

Where smooth Helorus floods the fruitful plain. ⁠955

Under Pachynus’ beetling precipice

We kept our course; then Camarína rose

In distant view, firm-seated evermore

By Fate’s decree; and that far-spreading vale

Of Gela, with the name of power it takes ⁠960

From its wide river; and, uptowering far,

The ramparts of proud Acragus appeared,

Where fiery steeds were bred in days of old.

Borne by the winds, along thy coast I fled,

Selinus, green with palm! and past the shore ⁠965

Of Lilybæum with its treacherous reef;

Till at the last the port of Drepanum

Received me to its melancholy strand.

Here, woe is me! outworn by stormful seas,

My sire, sole comfort of my grievous doom, ⁠970

Anchises ceased to be. O best of sires!

Here didst thou leave me in the weary way;

Through all our perils—O the bitter loss!—

Borne safely, but in vain. King Helenus,

Whose prophet-tongue of dark events foretold, ⁠975

Spoke not this woe; nor did Celæno’s curse

Of this forebode. Such my last loss and pain;

Such, of my weary way, the destined goal.

From thence departing, the divine behest

Impelled me to thy shores, O listening queen! ⁠980



Such was, while all gave ear, the tale sublime

Father Æneas, none but he, set forth

Of wanderings and of dark decrees divine:

Silent at last, he ceased, and took repose.

